a
AR INFORMATION AUGUST 1984
HUNGARIAN RESCUER
CENTENARY OFSTEGERIED
AUFHAEUSER
Transy vanian-born Andreas Biss has recently
passed his 80th birthday. During the Second
Ahundred years ago, on May 1, 1884, the trade
World War, he was among those who actively
union der Siegfried Aufhaeuser was born in
worked to save Hunganan Jery and he was
Augsburg. From 1920 until 1933 he was chairmann
closely involved in the Jews for forries negotia¬
of the "Arbeitsgemeinschaft freier Angestell-
on an account of his are activities
enverbande" (AFA) Until the Nazis came to
Der Stopp der Endlosung appeared in 1969 and
power he was also a social Democratic member of
the English version "A Millon Jews to Save in
the Reichstag and a member of the Reichswirts-
1973, and here are to be found Andreas Biss
chaftsrat. He left Germany in 1933 and, after
description of his confrontations with Eichmann
staying in Paris and Prague, settled in the U.S. in
and Himer.
1939. There he held several positions in emigrant
organisations. He also edited the New Yorken
WARSAWHEITHOTO
Staatszeitung und Herod" and was a regular
A too familiar are the photographs taken by
contributor to "Aufbau He returned to Berlin in
1951 and was elected chairman and in 1959, hon.
Wehnach propagandists of the destruction of
the Waraw Ghetto in 1943; but two years before
chairman, of the Deutsche Angestellten
the Uprising a German soldier had been in the
Gewerkschaften, Landesverband Berlin. In 1964,
he was made an on Citzen Stadtachester of
Gheto with his camera Joe Heydecker kept his
Berlin. He died on 6th December 1969 His daugh-
negatives for 40 years before issuing a book of
der Eva (Chava) Nicold is a member of the
Mustrations under the the "Wo ist ein Bruder
Kobutz Hazorda.
Aben?" and his photographs are now on display in
Page 11
the Munich City Museum, presented as the photo¬
diary of a German soldier Simultaneously, the
der Verlag is putting out a book on the wara
Gheto Mustrated by Heydeckers pictures.
He has already been associated with Johannes
Leeb in "Der Nuernberger Prozess".
HETTO DIARY
Fory ove years ago, Ly Goldenberg was re¬
stricted to the Warsaw Chetto, ving with 60 other
people in a cellar underneath the Hebrew Library.
Then aged she kept her diary from September
1939 to Januar 1940. In that month, the Nazis
allowed her to emigrate to Palestine, since she was
able to prove that she held an immigration cer¬
at allowing her to study at the Hebrew Uni¬
versity, Jerusalem. Today, Mrs Goldberg ves
in Te Aw, although her father and sisters
perished in the Holocaust. While she was cleaning
her at recently she came across the diary among
some other papers and is now on display at the
Holocaust Memoral Museum, Kibbutz Lohame
Hagettaot.