=== page 0001 ===
MARIANNE BARTON
TWO AMLES
Book 1: The Wolfsohn Family

=== page 0002 ===
CONT ENTS
BOOK ONE: THE WOLFSOHN FAMILY
introduction..................................................
My Mother's parents: Dr. Alfred and Lise Wolfsohn................
My Mother, Hilde Schiff, nee Wolfsohn...........................
The wood a song composed by Günther Wolfsohn, between pages 54-55
Dr. Günther Wolfsohn and his wife Theanee Posner.............55
The Wolfsohn Family Tree.............. . . . . . .
13 Plates of Family Photographs................. following page 59
BOOK TWO THE SCHIFF FAMI
(including the Baschwitz and Herzberg Families)
The Schiff Family............................... Page 1
Berthold Schiff................................................
Siegfried Schiff............................................
Paul Baschwitz................................................
The Herzberg Family..................................... 11
Dr. Joseph Herzberg and his wife Louise, nee Beschütz. 12
Pauline Baschwitz, nes Herzberg..........................17
Anna Schiff, née Baschwitz.................................. 21
Grete Sochaczewer,née Baschwitz............................ 28
Georg Baschwitz..............................................30
Alice (née Schiff) and Kurt Hammerstein........................
Dr. Fritz Schiff...............................................38
Jose Orabuena (Hans Sochaczewer)......................
Lotte Sochaczewer........................................61
Ernst Sochazcewer......................................... . . . .
Marianne Barton, née Schiff..............................64
In Memory of Dr.Schiff; an Article by Dr. Reuben Hecht. 69
Bibliography of Dr. F.Schiff.............................71
The Tomb of Bas-Schewa in Prague.......................74
The Herzberg and Schiff Family Trees....................... 75
The Schiff Family Tree...............................76
The Beschütz Family Tree..................................77
The Forefathers of Berthold Schiff.....................7
8 Plates of Family Photographs.............. following page 78

=== page 0003 ===
TWO FAMILIES
Biographical notes About
The Wolfsohn and the Schiff Families
Marianne Barton, née Schiff
Introduction
For my son lan Shefer, his wife Marciene Shapiro
and their sons, Brian and Randy.
I have written as much as much as I know about my family's
history, so that all this knowledge I have of our ancestors, either
through personal reminiscences, or through documentation, will not
be lost, when I shall no longer be around.
At that time in the future, you might like to have some
information of all those figures of the past, some of whose genes you
might well be carrying, and who will you turn to with your questions,
when I myself shall be but a memory?
Another aspect of this story is that I wish to pay homage to my
very beloved and much missed parents, They were such outstanding and
unusual people. There are not many contemporaries who still remember
them, and they too will not be around for long. With this effort of
mine I wish to say thank you to my parents for my life, and for what I
am.
There were quite a few remarkable characters among the Wolfsohn
and Schiff families, and I have enjoyed the opportunity to recall
these already shadowy figures briefly to life, do them justice and
honor them in this way
Apart from all the stories I have heard from my grandparents,
from my parents, and from my cousins, I was lucky to get the
Autobiography of my great aunt Grete Sochaczewer, which was sent to
me by her daughter-in-law Gerti Sawyer in Lissabon. It contains
invaluable material. More help came from my cousin Haim Caro in Geva,
Israel, who assiduously collected innumerable family documents, and
had them all photocopied and translated them into Hebrew for the sake
of his family. He also sent me photocopies of photos of the
family
More help came from Dr. Cecile Lowenthal-Hensel, a descendant
of the Mendelssohn family, and a historian who lives in Berlin. She
sent material from a rare book in her possession, about "Jewish
Marriages in Berlin,1759-1815.
I wish to thank all those, and most of all my dear husband Gerald
who has patiently supported my writing activity over the past four
years, and given me some excellent advice.
It has taken me over 4 years to write this account, because of
many unforeseen and inevitable interruptions. It is written from the
heart more than from scientific scrupously correct research,
because the latter is not my way of doing things. I hope however, it
does give a good general picture of all those dear figures forever
gone, and revived on these pages for a short while.
Honiton, Devon 1999

=== page 0004 ===
2
MY MY MOTHER'S PARENT
Lise Wolfson, nee Blumenhain and Dr. Alfred Wolfsohn
My mother's father was Dr. Alfred Wolfsohn, M.D, son of Max
Meyer Wolfsohn, also a doctor, and the son of a Rabbi. They lived in
the small town of Wollstein in the Province of Posen in Eas
Germany
Dr. Max Wolfsohn was a very handsome man. I have his photograph
hanging next to my desk. It used to hang by my mother's bedside. His
His
doctoral thesis is with my son Ilan Shefer in California.
grandson, Dr. Günter Wolfsohn looked very much like him. The only
special thing about him which I know is that he took over Dr. Rober
practice in order to
Koch's patients when the latter gave up his
Koch also lived in
devote himself, entirely to research. Dr.
Wollstein, and had his surgery there. However, one day his wife gave
him a microscope for his birthday and that changed the course of
medical history
Sorry to digress, but this is also part of the story. In the and
half of the 19th century, medical diagnosis was based on the doctor's
experience and observation, and less on scientific research as it is
practised nowadays. A country doctor was not too well off. Often he
was paid in kind by the farmers, artisans, and workers he was
treating, as these had no cash either. Therefore a microscope was a
luxury, Mrs. Koch probably saved up for this birthday present for a
long time, or maybe she did some work of some sort, until she had
enough money to pay for this precious instrument. Those were the days
when the average person worked hard, earned little, was modest and
mostly happy with his lot. Nowadays the average person is much better
off, and strangely enough not very happy with his lot
As soon as Dr. Koch started to gaze through his microscope, he
discovered wonderful things going on in the world unseen by the human
eve. Because of this his interest in research grew and grew. Among

=== page 0005 ===
Others he discovered the bacillus causing Tuberculosis, that
hoffendous killer. As his research took more and more time, the handed
his patients over to Meyer Wolfsohn, the only other doctor in town
willing to do so. Therefore great-grandpa Meyer has a share in Dr.
Roch's discoveries. By the way, Dr. Koch became quite famous in his
lifetime. Although no cure was found against Tuberculosis, at least
he found out what caused it, and how it could be prevented. He also
discovered the bacteria causing Asian Cholera and Bubonic Plague,
all terrible killer.
Meyer had 2 sons, Alfred and Julius, and a daughter Anna. I have
no idea who Anna was married to, but she had two daughters: Emmy and
lise. Emmy was Dodo Schlosser's (now living in Paris) mother, and
ilse became a dentist, married a doctor called Fritz (surname
unknown) and they have a daughter Baerbel who lives in Australia, and
who is a Professor of International Relations. She is married to Hugh
Bray, who is a Dr. on poultry. They have 3 children and several
grandchildren. But they would just be names. I mention this because,
I am still in touch with Dodo (born 1930) and Baerbel (born 1924)
Julius Wolfsohn also was a doctor in Berlin, I know he had a
daughter called Else who married somebody called Neuberg, they had
twins of who only the son survived. They emigrated to New Zealand in
1933. Their son Dr. Klaus Neuberg lives in England, I tried to get in
touch with him, but he never answered.
To return to my grandfather; Born 27.12.1861 he became a doctor
like his father Meyer. He married my beloved grandmother Elise
Blumenhain (born 17.9.1874) and moved into a Prussian village,
called Koenigswalde (translated means: Kingswood) where my mother,
Hilde was born, May 5th 1898. In those days doctors visited their
patients on horseback. There is a photograph of their house in the
family album
The only thing my grandfather ever told me about his youth is how
they stuffed geese for eating. It was thought that the fatter the
goose, the better, so these poor creatures were force-fed.
Unfortunately this vile practice is still continued by the
manufacturers of goose-liver.
Around the turn of the century my grandparents moved to
Elberfeld - perhaps they had had enough of village life. Neither do
know why they chose to move to Elberfeld which was not a particularly
attractive place, I suppose it might have been that my grandfather
had good professional prospects there. The family moved to a house in
the middle of the town, because it was one of the few houses which was
connected to the electric grid. My grandfather was a very progressive
and practical person. Electricity would facilitate his work. So he
moved into this not particularly beautiful house in the middle of
town, the 2-story flat was situated in the back looking out onto a
courtyard. The 2 floors were connected by a metal spiral staircase.
It clattered horribly when walking up and down. At the top there was
a small gate, to prevent people from inadvertently falling
through.
My mother told me the following story about those stairs. When
she and her brother Guenter, were children they were always
constructing things. One day my grandfather heard something coming
down the stairs accompanied by a dreadful clatter. He was alarmed
that it might be his small son: "Guenter", he cried, is that you?
"No, no,"Guenter shouted back,"it is only the pot of glue!" Coming
down with the pot, he had inadvertently dropped it.
Although the house was dark and strangely built, not in a
straightforward and square way, the main staircase to the flat was

=== page 0006 ===
lit by a huge stained glass in lovely Art-Deco style (Art-Deco was an
elegant style much in use at the turn of the century)
This style was a revolt against the heavy pseudo Gothic, pseudo¬
Renaissance style which had been so prevalent during the last half
of the 19th century. I do not remember the subject of the window, as
my grandparents moved out when I was about 5 years old. But at the top
in a sort of decorative band there was a little boy fleeing from a
bee, and above this scene, a ribbon with the words: "You nasty beast!
Don't sting me.
My grandfather was a great admirer of Bismarck (1815-1898) who
had founded the German Reich (Empire) of which he became chancellor.
Bismarck was a very strong character, apparently did a lot of good for
Germany on the social, financial and political plan, but was
dismissed by the German Emperor at the age of 75. As I do not know
anything about German history of that time, it is difficult for me to
say whether he was worthy of admiration or not.
Another person my grandfather admired was the composer Richard
Wagner (1813-1883) He admired him as a composer. He probably did not
know anything about Wagner the man, who was a vile scoundrel. Always
being short of money, he borrowed from his friends. When they, not
unnaturally asked him to repay the loan, he insulted them instead. He
seduced the wife of one of his greatest friends and admirers (the
conductor Hans von Buelow) and finally married her.
He got the
text for his opera "Tannhauser" from the Jewish poet Heinrich Heine
(1797-1856) and then proceeded to write antisemitic articles about
him. In fact he was fiendishly antisemitic, and an inspiration to the
antisemitism of the 3rd Reich, I can only hope that my grandfather did
not know about all this, and only admired the music, which was
strangely enough admired by a great many Jewish people, including my
parents, I cannot listen to it at all.
My grandfather also believed together, with many of his
contemporaries, that the best solution for the Jewish problem would
be assimilation, How wrong he was, poor man. It just shows that very
intelligent people can be much influenced by the current thought in
My grandfather
their time.
it seems, played the violin very beautifully, but by the time I was
around he had stopped playing. Another hobby of his was carving. I
remember a beautiful chest he had carved with figures and flowers,
and a corner chair, with 2 backs, with similar carvings. He was also
a keen photographer, photographing in what was then known as
"stereo" The photographs, were developed on glass plates, the same
photograph being printed twice. It was then viewed through a viewer
which looked like a pair of binoculars, and the resulting picture had
a lovely depth.
He had his own darkroom, and he taught his children all kinds of
scientific experiments. He also hunted, and I remember one poor
hare, which he had shot hanging at the back door of the kitchen.
Here is another characteristic story about my grandfather: My
grandfather being enchanted by all new inventions, was thrilled by
airoplanes, which in those days were in their infancy, small 2 seater
double deckers etc. whenever there was an opportunity he went by
plane, as he had been the Chairman (or some such title) of the Medical
Association of Rhineland-Westfalia, he had to travel locally quite a
few times, and when he could, he took a plane. One day in the middle of
the flight, the pilot ran out of petrol. He landed in the clearing of
a wood, and wandered to the nearest petrol station, while my
grandfather quite peacefully wandered about the wood studying the
flora and fauna. Such little things never upset him.

=== page 0007 ===
My grandmother Elise, nee Blumenhain (translated means: Flower
meadow) born 17.9.1874, was a most beautiful woman, Her eyes were the
colour of forget-me-nots, and her hair fair blonde. When her first
child, my mother was born, she was ever so embarrassed that the child
had dark eyes and black curly hair, which were like the eyes and hair
of my grandfather. Still, she loved her little daughter ever so much,
and truly my mother was the cutest baby you could imagine.
My grandmother's father was a gentile, but her mother was
Jewish. Apparently both families had disapproved of their children
marrying a person of a different religion, and especially my
grandmother's mother was badly treated by her very narrow-minded
family. The poor young woman died of cancer of the stomach at the age
of 36, after prolonged suffering. In those days there was hardly
anything that could be done to alleviate the cancer sufferer, and for
a child to watch this prolonged agony of her mother, and see her die
must have been a traumatic event.
After his wife's death, Lise's father remarried and went off to
America with his son, but leaving his daughter behind in the care of
her mother's rather nasty family, who were especially nasty to her,
because of her non-Jewish father. My mother told me that they made her
mother's life a misery, but she did not tell me how. I remember
visiting one of my grandmother's aunts when I was a very small child,
and she a very ancient lady. She lived in one of those horrible, dark
old Berlin flats, they were supposed to be elegant, but they were just
very dark, with long corridors, and the back rooms overlooked
cheerless back courtyards.
This particular old lady whose name was Aunt Jenny, a pretty
name for a nasty face, lived with a maid in cap and apron, and a
revolting fat pink and white slobbering pug dog, I remember feeling
totally surprised by everything I saw, because I had never been to an
old fashioned flat, and never seen such an old lady, and such a
disgusting dog,
Another relative
of my grandmother was a great, big fat lady, by the name of Aunt
Trude. She had a man's deep voice, and I thought her so horrible, that
when she came to see us, and I was about 5 or 6 years old at that time,
I opened the bottom drawer of the wardrobe in my room, and put my head
in, and could not be got out, until she left. My parents had a hard
time containing their laughter at this scene,
do not know how my grandparents met, but I am sure my
grandmother was very happy to find a way to get out of the clutches of
her nasty family, In those days, a girl from a middle-class family
could not just get up, and find herself a job, if she was unhappy at
home. Only in rare cases, could she study for a profession, if she had
a supporting and understanding family. The only girls and women who
worked, were members of the poor classes. They were expected to work.
But that was unthinkable for a Jewish middle-class girl, So marriage
provided an escape,
I have already described my grandfather He surely was an
attractive man for my grandmother, and she was not only beautiful,
but also very talented. She was a perfect housewife, too perfect
really, She could paint, draw, play the piano, she did exquisite
needlework. She was a perfectly brought up young lady. So I suppose
that in the beginning the marriage was a happy one, but by the time
was around, they seemed to live rather side by side than together. On
my grandmother's desk though, there was a photograph of my
grandfather as a young man, which seemed to me to be a sign of love and
care
There was a 13 year difference between their ages. This was

=== page 0008 ===
something I always heard mentioned. In my view I cannot think it would
affect a good marriage, I can only think that it was their difference
of temperament which created difficulties, My grandfather being a
calm, logical and scientific sort of person, and my grandmother
forever worrying about everything, which did not need worrying about
at all
I called this grandmother "Bunny Rabbit" because that was what
she called me, and when I talked about her, I called her Lise. One day
when I was still very small, my parents and I travelled by train from
Berlin to Elberfeld to see my grandparents, I was ever so excited at
the prospect of seeing them, and at that time I was a great
chatterbox, which stopped when I went to school, and all the way on
the journey I talked about Lise. In those days trains had closed
compartments for 8 people, and finally a gentleman sitting opposite
leaned over and asked, "Who is this Lise, you keep talking about?
Whereupon I replied, as I had presumably heard from my father; "She is
my Mother-in-Law!
Being the only grandchild, I was spoolt rotten. My grandmother
supervised my wardrobe, as if I had been a princess royal. She
embroidered the most loveliest dresses for me and dressed me up like
a doll with velvet dresses, lace collars and cuffs. In summer I had
printed muslin dresses with puff sleeves and huge collars. I even had
a black velvet winter coat with Ermine collar and cuffs! It was
incredible. I know my mother did not very much approve of this, but
she let her mother be,
At this stage I want to say that I loved "Bunny Rabbit" to
distraction, more than I loved my parents. She was so beautiful, and
so wonderful, I suppose it was the most pure love, I ever loved
anyone. My parents were always very careful with my education. Nobody
ever raised a voice, when I had done anything wrong or naughty.
Everything was most sensibly explained to me. Bunny Rabbit had a much
shorter temper, and she sometimes raised her voice, or told me what
she thought of me. But it did not matter one bit. I rather enjoyed
that I loved her so much, that I find it very hard even now, 60 years
later, to write about her, but I will do so in loving memory
As I already said my Grandmother was the perfect housekeeper.
Too perfect even. But then she had a large household to look after. My
grandfather's meals had to be on time, because of his very busy
schedule. So the household was very regimented, meals had to be
punctual. Grandmother, was an excellent cook, practically a chef. I
still have some of her recipes, and boy, on boy are they good She
worked very hard, although she had a live-in maid, who worked hard
too, and a woman who came in for cleaning once a week, who also worked
pretty hard. Directing this household was a full-time unpaid job.
From time to time, lots of colleagues of my grandfather were invited
for a sumptious lunch, and I can imagine what a state my grandmother
must have been in.
She also made lots of preserves, usually fruit, but in World War
I she preserved some chickens which my grandfather got as a payment
from a farmer, and put them in the larder. One day while the family
were at lunch, a loud explosion coming from the larder, had them all
on their feet in a minute. The chicken preserve had exploded!
Obviously the recipe had not been a good one, gases had developed in
the jars, and they had exploded. What a mess it must have made
With all this perfectionism in housekeeping, Bunny Rabbit
overdid it. When I saw Emmy (Dodo's mother) for the last time, which
was after my mother's funeral in October 1984, she told me that when
they were all young, Grandmother never found time to visit them,

=== page 0009 ===
because of "Work". Yet Emmy and her parents lived in Mannheim, a few
hours train drive away.
Bunny Rabbit was a slave to her household, which is surely an
impossible situation. One should never be a slave to anybody or
anything. To live in a clean, orderly house is certainly pleasant,
and really essential for hygienic purposes, and for making life
easier, but one must not overdo it to a point when you can't visit
your friends and relations, and when this over-fussiness creeps into
your conjugal relations, I would say that the motto is: A little less
scrubbing, a simpler cuisine and more leisure for human relations
will contribute to a happier life.
Bunny Rabbit was also over concerned about getting cancer,
because she had watched her mother die of it, which makes it
understandable. My grandfather explained to her in vain, that cancer
is not necessarily hereditary. She suffered from stomach pains, so I
always saw her taking powders. In those days, not so long ago, in the
thirties, people took powders which came in little square or round
cardboard boxes. The powders were measured by the teaspoonful, and
swallowed with water, the way we now take tables.
My grandfather probably quite correctly thought the stomach
pains were psychological in origin, and tried to talk her out of them.
But in vain. She took her powders, poor soul.
There is one lesson, I have learned from this story with the
dreadful end; Don't worry about things you don't know whether they
Poor Bunny Rabbit
will happen. Don't worry about unlaid eggs.
worried for years about getting cancer, yet what happened to her
unimaginable
finally: deportation, deprivation, humiliation,
misery, a probably terifying death, all this, mercifully she did not
imagine. It would have been child's game to die of cancer, instead of
being tortured and murdered.
As I have already mentioned I was the apple of my grandparents
eyes, and very spoolt by them. In the early 30ies my grandfather
bought a large house for me to inherit, and this is what caused their
bitter end.
The house was 3 floors high, had a huge cellar, and attic, and
between the ground floor and the 2nd floor there was an annex¬
consiting of a very elegantly wooden panelled washroom leading into a
semi-circular conservatory built into the garden. The conservatory
had a low window sill on which stoodflower pots filled with the most
beautiful plants. In the middle was a large round table at which we
took our meals.
The garden was small, surrounded by high ivy covered walls. The
back wall must have been at least as high as a 5-floor house. At the
back, along the top of it was another street. There was a cherry tree
in the garden, and lots of rhododendron shrubs. Leading down from the
garden were steps leading into a paved courtyard, which was in front
Bunny Rabbit always
of the kitchen, which was of huge dimensions.
chased everybody out of the kitchen, except the maid who worked in it.
She said that other people in the kitchen made her nervous. The other
people really were only my mother and myself. So it happened that my
mother never learned to cook. However, as my mother explained to me,
as she had studied chemistry, and physics, she could easily teach
herself cooking, and indeed she cooked very well, although quite
differently from her mother, and I cook differently again. My father
enjoyed both my mother's cooking and my own, but everytime he
remarked how differently we cooked. Yet I learned a lot of cooking
from my mother, who taught me in contrast to her own mother, and who I
had to replace when my mother was laid up with a very bad back and

=== page 0010 ===
could not move, I remember as a child of 13 or 14 going with a mixture
in the cooking pot to her bedside, and asking if I had done alright.
At about 15 I took over baking anyway, which I loved doing, although I
was never keen on eating cakes, just baking them.
Back to the house in the Brillerstrasse in Wuppertal:
Below the kitchen was the cellar which included a wine cellar,
and what was called in Germany; a Wash-kitchen. Once a month it was
washing day. All the washing was done by hand. There was a huge boiler
in which all the washing was boiled.
The only luxury my Grandma had
was a centrefuge for wringing. Otherwise all the work was done by 2
washerwomen. You could always tell in Wuppertal when washing was done
in a house, because the cellars had small windows at street level, and
the steam was pouring out.
The entrance to the house was sumptuous with an empty hall
leading to double doors, until you entered the house the house
proper, A door led from the empty hall into my Grandfather's waiting
room, where there was a huge terrestrial globe on a stand and antlers
hanging from the walls. From the entrance, as well as from the waiting
room, doors led into the surgery (practice room) It was very full
with a huge desk, a white medicine cabinet, a workable, as in those
days doctors did their lab work mostly themselves, an examination
couch, a sofa and a bookcase, and a huge picture of Bismarck on the
wall.
On the second floor was a sitting room with Bunny Rabbit's desk,
on which beside photographs there was a bust of Dante, strangely
enough. I cannot imagine Bunny Rabbit reading Dante. There was also a
replica of the classic figure of the boy taking a thorn out of his
foot. There was Grandpa's favorite leather armchair with a standing
lamp next to it. In the evening he used to sit there, smoking a pipe,
or a cigar, and I read Karl May's stories about Winnetou the brave Red
Indian, and his white friend, Old Shatterhand, to him. He always
looked very amused. We both liked Karl May. Much later my father told
me that Karl May was a favorite with the Nazis, so I never touched any
of his books again. In one corner there was a corner sofa, and a round
table, and while I read stories to my grandfather, who had cataract in
both eyes, Bunny Rabbit and my mother were doing needlework at the
round table, there was also a glass book case containing the most
wonderful books for me to read; The German Classics. Goethe and
Schiller were there in huge gold embossed volumes, measuring about
lix" (3) They were profusely illustrated in either
engravings or pen and ink drawings, and the most wonderful time for me
was to lie stretched out on my tummy, on the living room floor carpet,
in the afternoon when it was siest time, the huge volume of Goethe or
Schiller lying on the floor, and I was literally devouring them. Also
there were Mozart's letter, a Beethoven biography, and many more
works, which have accompanied me ever since.
I also discovered a book about Goethe's house in Weimar. It was
bound in pretty paper, and suddenly I saw that that paper was the same
as the wallpaper in our staircase, I searched for information about
this paper, and found that it was the same paper as the wallpaper in
the staircase of the Goethe House in Weimar, and immediately told
everybody about it. Naturally everybody was quite surprised about my
find.
Also in this room, my mother taught me music appreciation. My
Grandparents had aquired a very smart gramophone, in a smart cabinet
on legs. Until the age of 10 or so I had not been very appreciative of
music. Perhaps, because there was no musical instrument in the house
of my parents, except my father's cello, which he hardly ever

=== page 0011 ===
touched, and which was not attractive anyway. Also my parents
befriendeed a young lady of huge proportions, (especially to me, who
was a very tiny child) who studied singing, and who came from time to
time to consult my parents, as an authority, about her singing. She
planted herself in our small living cum dining room, and started to
yell and howl. At least that was my opinion. And I thought it so
dreadful to watch, that I retired under the dining table, which was
covered with a heavy table cloth, and like a nice, cosy tent. My
father sang me arias from Mozart's Operas to me before going to bed. I
liked them, but obviously could not understand the scope of that
music.
So one day my mother put the disc of the Overture to "A Midsummer
Night's Dream" by Mendelssohn on the gramophone, and while the music
was playing, she told me about all the elves, and the rough people in
the play, and about Puck, and how you could hear all those people in
the music, and I just loved it, and have loved music ever since.
My mother also made me a beautiful dress from crepe paper, in
which I danced to that music on the last day of the year, in front of
all the family, celebrating the end of the old year.
Back to
From one side of the living room an arch led into the dining room
with its huge table, chairs, and immense cupboard on one side.
Everything in the dining room was black and dismal. Apparently those
pieces of furniture had been bought with the house. In the extension
of the dining room stood the grand piano. It was not much in use when I
was a child. It had been mostly for the use of Guenther, who had
absolute pitch, and could play the piano from a very early age, and
my mother as a child. Later, when Guenther and Thea lived in
Jerusalem, my grandparents sent it to them.
On the third floor was my grandparents bedroom, a huge bathroom,
with 2 washbasins, a large bath and one of those huge white linen
cupboards. At the bottom of the linen closet were 2 large drawers, and
in one of them I found a lot of card games for kids. One of them was
what was called a Quartet. This one was a poet's quartet. Each poet
had four cards alloted to him, and his works, and you had to get all
the 4 cards of one poet, and the more poets you got, the greater were
your chances of winning. I can still see myself, sitting on the
bathroom floor, going through the poets, whose birth and death days
were printed next to their names. To my horror, I found out that poor
old Shakespeare, of the lovely "Midsummer Night's Dream, had died on
his birthday!!!! I was immensely sorry for him, especially as he had
missed out on all those beautiful presents his family must have
prepared for him. At that time, I must have been around 10 years old.
in the second bedroom were 2 beds for my mother and myself
when we stayed there, a sewing machine, a wardroom with a large
mirror, a table and a few chairs, there was also a washbasin, and a
bird age on the window sill.
I was always sent to bed at 8 o'clock, but I remember it took me
or so it seemed, a long time to go to sleep. And later when I stayed
for a whole year with my grandparents, while my parents tried to
establish themselves in Paris, I remember being very frightened by
the Nazi troops marching past, singing bloodthirsty songs.
While I was staying for a year with my grandparents andmy
parents were trying their luck in Paris, I had an abcess on one
tonsil, and was kept in bed for one month in this very room, with the
finches singing their hearts our in their cage. Mygrandfather hoped
the abcess would go away on its own, but it did not.
Would you believe it, everyday he brought me a new present,

=== page 0012 ===
toys, books, children's papers, fruit. Spoilt rotten. After a while
he had 2 other doctors come in to look on my abcess. They mumbled a
lot, and I clearly remember my Grandfather saying: "On any other
child, I would recommend an operation, but not on this one." Still,
one cold, January afternoon, I was bundled up in warm clothes, and we
went to Hospital by taxi. I remember being sat on a nun's knees. She
held me tightly with her arms and legs. An ether mask was placed on my
face, I remember counting a bit, and off I was. When I came too, the
abcess was out, I took my Grandfather's hand, and we marched through
the long silent corridoors, down a huge staircase to a waiting taxi,
and drove home. I was well again, Friends came to see me, and said:
"How pale you are!" After a while, I had to go back to school again,
which I did not like.
Up in the attic there was a huge room with spare wardrobes,
tables, my mother and her brother's old toys, which consisted of a
doll's house which they had built from Meccano parts. It contained a
lift (elevator) which had been activated by some electrical machine.
Also there was something called "An electricity producing machine
You had to turn a handle, which set several wheels in motion and it
produced beautiful sparks. I don't know what else it did. There were 2
oblong wooden boxes, with sliding tops, which contained two
articulated dolls, about 20 cms. (8) long, and their huge wardrobe,
all hand sawn by my mother, Those dresses were exquisite with layered
skirts edged in lace and lace collars and ouffs
grandfather, also did
lot
and
photography,
developing, and when his children were young, he allowed them to work
with him in the darkroom, unlike Bunny Rabbit who chased them out of
the kitchen, and all that stuff was standing in one corner, as well as
a clothes mangle. At the end of this huge room, was the maid's room.
And still higher up, a ladder led to another attic, where all the
washing was hung, and a little room where there was a lot of spare
furniture including a rocking chair. Sometimes, when I felt very
adventrous I climbed up to the top, and sat in the rocking chair, but
I really felt frightened there, and expected a ghost to appear at any
moment.
What I did not think of, in those days was, what an appalling
job it was to carry the laundry all the way up from the cellar to the
attic to dry.
I remember however Bunny Rabbit complaining bitterly about
back pains, marching up and down the stairs all day, she had grown a
bit stout in those days, which did not make things easier. My mother
always held her up as a warning example what happened to a pretty
figure, if you don't exercise, and wore a corset. She told me her
mother wanted to put her quite needlessly into a corset at the age of
14 or so, and my mother blankly refused. Instead she went on long
walks, did rowing, tennis playing, later mountain climbing, and kept
her figure, while poor Bunny Rabbit expanded. I did a lot of
exercising, wore no corset, but also expanded in my late 50ies,
though not as much as Bunny Rabbit. But my mother once said that I am
starting to remind her of her mother, which I did not mind, but I
started to get on a diet, which helped.
Also Bunny Rabbit's glasses were never on the floor where she
was, so she rushed about the house chasing her glasses. Which
probably was quite healthy for her, but obviously she did not see it
that way. She did have 2 pairs, but in such a large house, she would
have needed at least 5 pairs.

=== page 0013 ===
I doubt Bunny Rabbit was ever happy in that house. It was far too
big. Looking back now with the wisdom of hindsight, and having lived
for 71 years on old planet earth, I must say, I wonder why my
Grandfather had ever bought it. What did he need such a large house
for? It must have cost a fortune. Not only that, but he bought it at a
time of rising antisemitism in Germany. In the thirties, the writing
on the wall must have been there for all to see. And I am also
convinced that my grandmother did not like the idea of buying this
house at all But unfortunately, I have a feeling that my grandfather
did what HE liked, and not pay any attention to what his wife said. He
probably thought she was a panicmaker. He seemed to have been quite
headstrong. As far as I can make out from my mother's remarks,
grandfather bought it for me to inherit. How he must have loved me to
do this. I appreciate it immensely, but with sadness in my heart too.
I am afraid he just burdened my conscience with something which I find
hard to come to terms with.
I am now jumping on to the year 1937, the year my parents and
myself had come to what was then "Palestine", an event of which I will
write later on, but it is part of the story of my grandparents, so I
must mention it here. My parents and myself lived together in one flat
with my mother's brother Guenther and his wife Thea, because that was
cheaper for both families. In those days life was atrociously
difficult, wages were hunger wages. Although my father was employed
by the Jewish Agency as a museum curator, he got a pittance, and even
for this his rightful salary, he had each month to go to the Jewish
Agency, and bang the table to get it, there being no trade unions at
the time. My mother tried to supplement the income by sewing sheep
skin slippers for an artist who made her living the same way, and just
did not have enough time to saw enough slippers. This artist's
husband was an architect and artist quite a famous one too (Leopold
Krakauer, known as "ElKa") but he did not earn enough either. That is
what life looked like in those days, especially for high qualified
cademics.
In 1938 my Grandparents came as tourist to visit us, and to see
how they could settle in Palestine, which was held as a Mandate by the
British Government. They only allowed a certain "quota" of Jewish
immigrants in. In order to enter legally you had to apply for a
"Certificate" You also had either to be recommended and vouched for,
or bring in 1000 Marks, which in those days was quite a lot of
money.
If you did not have either, you could come as a tourist, and
"vanish" into a Kibbutz, or Moshav, go into hiding for a while, and
later mingle with the rest of the population. Nobody really paid
attention to that.
The whole family urged my grandparents to stay on illegally, but
my grandfather would not hear of it. He was of the old school. In 1938
he was 77 years old, and set in his ways. He wanted to do things in
good German order. Sell the house, and come legally with 1000 Marks.
In vain, everyone told him that there was really no time for that. He
was sure he could do it, instead of having to live on the small income
of his children, that is, being dependent on them, and crowding
together in a small flat.
People tried to persuade him that it would be wiser, to leave
everything behind, and save their precious lives. A war with Germany
assure to break out within a short time. The writing was on the wall.
My poor grandmother who was only 64, pleaded that she would do any
job, cleaning, sawing cooking, baking, anything to earn a living,
but just be safe.

=== page 0014 ===
She cried and cried, but my grandfather insisted: "We return to
Germany and put our house." I suppose he could not imagine
that he, Dr. Wolfsohn, well known in Elberfeld for over thirty years,
and once, the revered chairman of the Medical Association of
Rhineland-Westfalia could be in danger from the Nazis. A strange lack
of realism, possibly due to old age.
Even when they entered the taxi which took them to Haifa to board
ther ship for the long journey back, the family tried to pull them
back
but my grandfather refused to stay.
Back in Germany they applied for a certificate to enter
Palestine legally. It arrived on the day the war broke out... It is a
most tragic story, and very hard for me to write down, but it part of
life, and must be recorded for posterity.
We heard from my grandparents through the "Red Cross Letter
Service" which ran a message service between enemy countries.
In the early 40ies my grandparents were forced to sell their
house, and its contents for a paltry nominal sum. They lived in a
room rented to them by a doctor, a colleaque of my grandfather, who
rather courageously took them in.
I have two Red Cross letters, or rather messages, a message was
only to be about family news of strictly personal character, and was
not to exceed 25 words. The first message was sent by my mother to her
mother on her birthday, on the 17th of September 1941. It says:" Thank
you for your birthday greetings, Today we are thinking of you with
heartfelt birthday wishes, We are all healthy, Marianne is attending
an arts and crafts school and is studying drawing and handweaving
The birthday greetings my
Heartfelt greetings to both of you.
mother was thanking them for, had been for my birthday
The answer of the recipient had to be sent on the reverse of
this message; It is dated 13th December 1941 (Which shows how long it
took these messages to go through) My grandparents wrote: "Highly
delighted that everyone is well, and about Marianne's choice for a
profession. We are well and healthy. We are expecting with great
longing the news about a happy family event. Heartfelt greetings.
The happy family event of the future was of course
Mother Father."
the birth of Gabriela, born 4th November 1942
Their last letter sent through the Red Cross, on the ist of
August 1942, before their deportation was addressed to their son
Guenther. The Red Cross letters were not sent through the regular
mail. They had to be fetched personally from the Red Cross Office, who
obviously sent a notice to that effect, I do not remember why I was
sent to fetch it. I do not even remember, if I was sent by my aunt Thea
or my mother, I only remember going to the Red Cross Office, housed in
a high rise building facing Montefore's famous windmill, which is
still a landmark in Jerusalem.
The message said;" On leaving Elberfeld we are sending
heartiest farewell greetings with best wishes for a happy future.
As soon as we will know our new address we will let you know. Father
That was the last we ever heard of them.
Mother.
On reading this message, I was totally shocked. I knew only too
53 years have passed
well what that meant. It was a last adieu.
since, but I can still see myself standing in the bright August
sunlight, on front of the tall skyscraper, facing the windmill,
blinded by tears, and observing unhappily that life around me went on
as ususal, as if nothing had happened. There were people walking
about, cars whizzing by the trees lining the avenue were gently
swaying in the breeze. Life went on as usual

=== page 0015 ===
As if people were not getting heartbreaking messages through the
Red Cross, and unimaginable atrocities were happening in that hell
that was Nazi Germany, happening to my dearly beloved grandparents,
to the beloved parents of my mother and my uncle!
I rushed home, but not to my mother, or to Guenther because I
thought that the pain of this message was too hard for them to bear.
I sought out Thea who was in the kitchen. I assume my father was out at
work, otherwise I would have gone to him. So I chose the next
I showed her the letter. I was
strongest person which was Thea.
crying, The told me to stop crying immediately, which I did. Nobody
must know I had been crying. She took the letter, and told me not to
tell anyone about it, "We will keep this to ourselves", she said. So
I kept my mouth shut, and went about life as if nothing had happenend,
but the contents of the letter, and the conclusion to be drawn from it
were within me all the time.
I shall be eternally grateful to Thea that she took matters,
wisely and firmly in hand, I suppose my parents and Guenther must have
realised after some time what had happenend, when no further messages
arrived. Perhaps Thea told them. Nobody ever mentioned the subject.
At least not to my knowledge. Perhaps it was kept from me. I don't
know.
After the war researches were made through the Red Cross
Research Service, A laconic, preprinted information sheet arrived
one day, saying that my grandparents had been taken to Theresienstadt
in July 1942 (which seems a mistake, as their last message had been
dated August), and from there, in September 1942 to Mali-Trostine in
Czechoslovakia. 2000 people were taken there, and only 103 returned.
My grandparents had not been among them.
It was only then that my mother talked to me about the message of
August 1942, and expressed her admiration that I had shut up about it.
But I think it wasn't so admirable, I had thought it had been the
least thing to do to spare her pain.
I always hesitated to speak to my mother about her parents,
although later on they were more and more mentioned in our
conversations. But we never mentioned their tragic end. But it was
there - hovering in the atmosphere. How did my mother cope with this
great pain? She was very wise, and certainly realised the futility of
torturing oneself with thinking about past events, which cannot be
changed, and that the living have to get on with their lives as best
as they can, which also a way of honouring one's ancestors.
At this juncture I would like to say that I have no wish
whatsoever to return to either Elberfeld or Berlin, My idea is that
once you have been thrown out, and quite without reason too, you stay
out, and let people have a bad conscience they threw you out in the
first place.
After World War II, the German not only realised to their
enternal shame that they had murdered 6 Million Jews and some Million
Gypsies, but they had also killed the elite of Germann
intellectuality, and that the spice of thought, a speciality of the
Jewish intellect had gone from German thought forever, A little late
revenge, and as my father taught me, the Italians say: "La vendetta si
mangia al freddo That is: "Revenge is eaten cold.

=== page 0016 ===
a
Many Germans Jews have received invitations from their place
of birth in Germany, of where they had been active, at the expense of
their hosts: Flights, hotels, excursions, visits to theatres,
concerts, the lot. Strangely enough many people have accepted this
kind of atonement. I could never do that. Pride forbids it. Never
could I go back to where I had been a happy child with my parents, and
my grandparents. It would simply break my heart.

=== page 0017 ===
MY MOT HER.
My mother was born on the 19th of May 1898 in the little village
of Koenigswalde in East Prussia as I have already mentioned. She was
called Hilde Friederike. Her brother Guenter was born there too, two
years later in 1900.
As I have already said, my mother had very black curly hair, and
enormous dark eyes, very much like her father, and the daintest
upturned nose ever seen on a human face. Guenter looked very much
like his grandfather, the father of his father. His head had the same
shape. Somewhat lean and longish. He had brown hair and brown
eyes.
Both Hilde and Guenter were very gifted children in the fields
of science, mechanics, and music. They shared many activities. I
rember seeing what was called "An Electrifying Machine. It was made
up of wheels and shafts, quite a small machine, which was put on the
table. When you turned a handle, it produced beautiful sparks in all
colours of the rainbow, flying out of one of the wheels. These sparks
They had also built a doll's house,
had a particularly nice smell.
from a Meccano set. It was several floors high, had electric light,
and a lift powered by batteries. It had furniture, and little dolls in
it as well, some of them made by the children.
Their father also allowed them to assist him in his darkroom
where he developed his own photographs, which he took mostly on a
stereo camera. They were developed on glass slides, with the same
picture right and left, and viewed through a special viewer, like a
binocular, and the photographs could be seen as 2-dimensional.
I have already written how my mother sewed the most exquisite
dresses for her little dolls. Both children played the piano from a
very early age on, and did little compositions. Guenter had an
absolute pitch and was unusually gifted musically,
Here is a charming incident in the lives of my mother and her
brother; The town of Elberfeld was situated in a hollow, surrounded
by wooded hills. The family used to walk a lot in these woods, on
Sundays, or on free afternoons. In winter it snowed regularly.
Everything was covered in deep snow, I remember how as a child of six
we walked on the roads and paths of those woods, which were packed
with solid snow you could walk on. But if you stepped out of the path,
you were in really deep snow, and I remember standing waist deep in
the snow!
So in winter you took your wooden sleigh - you had to pull it up
the hillside - and went to the top of the woods, and then you sat on
the sleigh, usually two or three people, depending on the length of
the sleigh, and slid down the whole length of the large path in the
wood, until you came to the nearest houses. These houses, mostly
villas, where still on higher ground than the town itself, and you
could slide down even further on the pavement, until you came to the
more crowded places.
When my mother and her brother were children, they took their
sleigh up the hill, and joyfully glided to town. One day they had the
idea of taking a shortout through a lane which was closed to traffic,
when lo and behold they met a policeman waiting for them at the foot
of the steep lane. "Don't you children know it is forbidden to ride
on this lane?" he asked them. Alas, yes, they knew, "Right", said the
policeman,"I have to take down your names, and address", and he took
out his little notebook and pencil, and asked them for their names.
"Are you the children of
"Hilde and Guenter Wolfsohn, they said.
Dr. Alfred Wolfsohn?
Yes, they said, "we are.

=== page 0018 ===
"How sad" said the policeman, closed his notebook, and "Off you
go this time", he said, "but don't let me catch you again!
Which shows you how well known and beloved my grandfather was. And
nobody ever found out, why the policeman was sad. Whether it was
because a revered person like Dr. Wolfsohn, had such naughty
children, or whether he did not have a "case
On summer holidays the family went to nice places by the
seaside, or into the mountains of Germany and Switzerland.
When my mother went to High School, she was already much in
demand as a mathematician by her fellow pupils. She went to school by
tram, where she met her schoolmates with unfinished homework, and she
helped them finish it. Once, when she was preparing for the final
exams, she worked so hard that she fainted at her desk. She woke up,
lying on the floor. As this was in the year 1916, right in the middle
of World War 1, it could be that she did not get enough of the right
food. Although during the war, my grandfather was paid in kind by the
farmers who lived around Elberfeld, and who were his patients. So
usually the family got butter, cheese, eggs, and chickens.
Mother also had an excellent drawing teacher who taught her more
than some people learn at an art school. When my mother finished
school, she found it heard to decide which subject she wanted to
study: Arts, crafts or mathematics. Mathematics won the contest, and
she decided to study at the University of Mannheim, in the south of
Germany. In those days students went to the university where there
was a particular good teacher in their chosen subject, and if the
favourite professor moved to another University, his students
followed him to that university. So I think my mother chose to study
at the University of Mannheim, because there must have been a good
maths teacher there.
My grandmother was rather scared at thought that her little
daughter was going to live all on her own, in the middle of the war, in
a strange town, But my mother wasn't scared in the least.
She had always been a very progressive woman, and a very logical
At the age of 12 her mother wanted her to wear a corset,
person.
because that was done in those days. But my mother, very sensibly
refused, and pointed out to her mother, that wearing a corset causes
flabby muscles, and a bad posture. Instead she played tennis, rowed,
and went on rambles, which the whole family did anyway. All of which
did her a great deal of good. In the same way, her mind told her that
it was probably no worse living in Mannheim than in Elberfeld.
In Mannheim she rented a room in a "pension", a boarding house,
run by two elderly spinsters. One morning my mother woke up, looked
out of the window, and lo and behold!!! some buildings on the other
side of the road had been badly hit by night-bombing! My mother had
slept soundly through it! When the alarm had sounded, which my mother
did not hear either, the 2 spinster dashed into the cellar, together
with other lodgers who had also woken up, but nobody seemed to have
thought about my mother, as usual she had been right to have had a
good night's sleep.
My mother had always been a sound sleeper, except for the last
few years of her life, a life full of great shocks to the system, and
terrible events. She used to take a Mogadon (a sleeping pill) but I
always wondered if it had any real effect on her, after such a long
time, and whether she wasn't sleeping her own sleep after all, as even
in her old age, she was still a very harmonious, sensible, well
balanced being, in spite of all the adversities in her life.

=== page 0019 ===
From Mannheim, my mother at some stage during her student days,
moved to the University of Munich. She was studying mathematics,
physics and chemistry, and had to take an additonal subject. She
chose philosophy. It was at the philosophy lectures that my parents
met. This is what my parents, told me about, the course on
philosophy:
The professor held the course, sitting at one end of an oblong
table. He had long hair, of which he was obviuosly very vain, as he
kept stroking it with his hands looking very superior to the rest of
the poor, benighted humanity.
One of his favourite subjects was:
The False Conclusion. In order
to demonstrate how easily one can
reach a false conclusion, he said the following: "It is said that all
artists have long hair.
I have long hair, and at this point he
voluptuously stroked his mane,
therefore I am an artist. False
conclusion!
But he must have been either lecturing on some highly
complicated, and intricate ways of thought, or he was not very good
at presenting his subject matter, because most students did not quite
understand what he was talking about, or at least, not everything.
Only one did, and that was my father who was very good at interpreting
meanings of complicated subjects. So after the lecture all the
students gathered round my father, who explained the professor's
lecture.
During the lecture my father sat right opposite my mother at
that famous oblong table. He saw the prettiest girl in the world:
A delicate oval face, encircled by a mass of black curly hair. Huge
dark eyes, slanting upwards, a delicate small, upturned nose, and a
bewitching smile, showing pearly little teeth. She was petite and
delicate, and in great contrast to the large heavy German girls,
among which she looked like an exotic flower, And she was highly
intelligent too.
Because of her exotic looks, some people thought she came from
Russia, or the Far East, and she told me that some students tried to
befriend her because they thought she could provide them with stamps
from far-off countries. Remember that in those days the world was not
as "Small" as it is today, You could not fly anywhere within 24 hours.
It took lengthy train and boat journeys to get anywhere.
She also had a tough time warding off unwanted attentions,
because of her unusual looks. She did not care about boy friends.
But my father was different. It was not surprising that my father
fell in love with my mother That my mother fell in love with my
father just showed her wisdom in finding the suitable person.
My father was good looking too, with warm, brown velvety eyes,
an aquiline nose, and a sensitive mouth. In those days he was going
through a very romantic stage. He wore his hair long (this was right
after World War I, in the very early 1920ies) a huge hat with immense
borders, and a cape like a cavalier. It did look dashing, but probably
also a bit funny and unrealistic to my mother, who was quite a
realist. So was my father, but he liked to dress up in those days. She
realised however, that beneath the costume there was a valuable
personality, a man of great integrity, intelligence, wit and vision.
She also noticed his hands which were unusually beautiful; long
tapered fingers covered in supple flesh with elegantly shaped long
nails.
My mother always told me to watch people's hands, because she
said: "They can tell you a lot about a person's personality." So
obviously, my father had the right kind of hands.

=== page 0020 ===
7
They eventually got married while they were still students, at
that time in Heidelberg, in the year 1923. My grandparents did not
approve of their daughter's marriage. In their eyes my father was a
penniless, unpractical person whose subject: Art History, was
useless, for, earning money, and who associated with doubtful
characters, like artists, musicians and writers, who in those days
were associated with "Starving in garrets". Also my father was a bit
of a radical and revolutionary in his outlook, and not conservative
as my mother's parents.
However, my mother did what she considered the right thing to
do, like in her choice of studies, and my grandparents bowed to the
inevitable.
My father who was 32 by the time they married, evidently had had
quite a bunch of lady friends before he met my mother, and some of
those ex-girl friends we met later in Israel. My goodness me: they
were no match for my mother. They had not grown up, or aged
gracefully. And I used to congratulate my father on his good choice,
and lucky escape.
My father's mother, about whom I shall write later, told me how
my father introduced his bride to her. She said;" In came the
prettest young lady with the loveliest smile, carrying a small
basket with freshly picked flowers, which she had made up for me. I
was quite carried away by this charming apparition". The two ladies
remained the best friends for ever after.
Now here is a little story, which is a bit of a digression, but
which I will write down right here, where it belongs in time, to show
you, how old our connections with the Francke family are: My parents
were still living in rented rooms. So they had lunch at a private
house, where the owner, to supplement her income, served lunch to a
certain number of regular customers (as many as could gather round
her dinner table probably). This was done by many people in those
destitute days. It was called a "Mittagstisch, which means:
Lunchtable. Food in such a place was probably cheaper and better than
in a restaurant. The lady of this particular "Lunchtable" where my
was no other than Mrs Francke, Hans's and Kurt's
parents went to
mother. After their stay in Heidelberg, my parents and Mrs. Francke
never met again until 1946 in Israel when I had just been married to
Uri Spanjer-Herford, and we rented a room from her in Givataim, at
that time, a suburb of Tel Aviv. So my friendship with the Franckes
dates from that time.
After this digression, back to my mother. When both my parents
had finished their studies, they moved to Berlin, Probably because my
father had a job there. As I have written before; my mother went to
Elberfeld for my birth, and then returned to Berlin with her new baby.
Here is a story she told me about that time: My parents lived in
a rented flat in a house with a lovely garden. When the weather was
nice, my mother put the pram with myself inside, into the garden for
fresh air. Apparently I was a very restless energetic baby, and used
to rock about in the pram, shaking the vehicle like a storm-tossed
boat at sea. But apparently the pram, although it was on quite high
wheels, but very large ones, never toppled over. It looked a bit
precarious, but it was safe. One day there was a ring at my parent's
door, a nice, middle aged lady, introduced herself as a neighbour.
She said she was doing professional needlework, working for many
hours, sitting at her window. Whenever she took her eyes off work, and
looked into the garden, there was this madly shaking pram and she
simply could not take it any more, she had to warn my mother of the
danger of the pram over turning over. My mother calmed her fears, and
proved to her, by the laws of physics, that the pram could not topple
over which in fact it never did.

=== page 0021 ===
After living in that house at some stage my parents moved into
the flat which I remember living in as a child, It was situated in a
huge block of flats, 3 floors high. The block formed a square around
a courtyard planted with grass. The courtyard was purely ornamental.
Nobody was allowed into it. It was a typical German "Verboten
(prohibited) zone. It would have been too noisy with kids playing
there, and people sitting around talking Mediterranean fashion, or
even like a public square anywhere else in the world, except in
Germany.
The whole block had 4 or 5 entrances on each street and was
built of white brick. On each floor there were 2 flats. Each flat had
a balcony. Above the the third floor ran the attic all built in rough
wood, and partitioned off into rooms. Each flat had a room to itself,
as a store room, and there was a large common room for hanging up the
washing.
A caretaker, called Muselius, looked after, the houses,
presumably cleaning and keeping things in good repair, and also
sweeping up the dead leaves falling off the trees lining the street.
I remember how for the first time I was aware of the leaves falling in
autumn, and being worried about it. But my parents told me that after
expressing my concern. I immediately comforted myself with the
words: "Never mind. Uncle Muselius will hang them back again.
Our flat was on Schoenhauser Street 18. It consisted of a
bedroom, and a living/dining room with a balcony to the front, and
my room, a room for the live-in- maid, a bathroom, and a kitchen
all to the back, All the rooms were connected to the fairly large
entrance hall, in which there was a swing for me. On the balcony wild
vines were growing in boxes. They provided shade and privacy, and in
autumn turned into the most gorgeous shades of red, yellow, brown and
green. In one corner of the balcony there was a drain hole on the
For some reason, I loved to
floor, for the rain water to flow off.
sweep the balcony floor with a handbrush. One day, the handbrush got
stuck in the drainhole. It frightened me very much. Perhaps I
identified with the brush. I ran to my mother terrified, and
said; "The brush is scared." Obviously my mother knew what it was all
about, and rescued the poor brush, and all was well.
I was also scared to death of going down the drain of the bath,
but while I was having my bath, stories were told to me, and I forgot
about it.
Both my mother and my father were busy working in those days. My
mother was a teacher at a girl's school, which was quite a tram's
journey away on the other side of Berlin, She had to leave the house
at around 7 in the morning, and came home around 2pm, laden with
exercise books to correct. In those days the exercise books had a hard
cover, prettily covered in multi-coloured marbled paper. They
looked nice, but they were incredibly heavy to carry, and I assume
that carrying these heavy books laid the foundation to mother's bad
back. She had always been of a very delicate build.
It had not been simple being Jewish, to become a teacher in the
early 20ies in Germany. My mother had passed her Ph.D. with flying
colours. A note in her Ph.D. certificate reads: "She distinguished
herself by unusual perspicacity and clearness of mind.
In order to become a teacher, she had to pass State Teacher's
Examinations. After having failed these twice for no apparent
reason, an inquiry showed that antisemitic examiners failed her,
because she was Jewish. This was in 1925, during the Weimar Republic.
She was offered apologies, and was immediatley passed without
further test.

=== page 0022 ===
The next day, she was offered a job, as good math teachers were
rare after World War I
There was also a shortage of English teachers and she was
asked to teach English as well. She had studied it at school, but it
really was not her subject. So she brushed up her English with the
help of a book called;"1000 words of English" It was full of cartoons
with English captions underneath, together with the phonetics, and
the translation into English. My mother must have studied it when I
could already read a bit, because I remember looking into the book. On
the first page there was a drawing of two ladies having tea at a
table. Underneath it said: "Please give me the sugar." This was the
first English sentence I learnt, and the only one I remember from that
time.
Although my mother taught such a difficult subject as higher
mathematics at a girl's school, she was much beloved by her students.
Not only was she an excellent teacher, she had a fascinating
personality, and was exceedingly pretty. I have a group photograph
of her with one of her classes. There they were, all those huge, buxom
German girls, and in front; my mother, quite small and dainty.
I also have a note smuggled by girls around the classroom, which
my mother intercepted. It contains possible solutions to a problem,
and also saying;" Schiffchen (meaning little ship) is sweet, I love
her". Two or three of these girls came to see her privately, just for
friendship. Mother corresponded with one of them, Erika Carius, till
the day she died, interrupted only by the war. After the war she heard
from Erika again, Erika had been working throughout the war. Her
husband had been exempt, from military, service, because of
tuberculosis and diabettes, Right after the war they were short of
insulin. So mother managed to send her some insuline Erikas husband
thanked her after she had faithfully nursed him through the hardships
of the war, by leaving her for another woman. But happily after some
time she met a very nice, suitable man, and both lived happily
married, until he died. After my mother's death, I continued the
I got a note from her
correspondance with Erika, until one day,
daughter, Corinna Loeffler, telling me she had died. I continue a
sort of vague correspondence with Corinna, but we really don't know
each other, and she is after all some 25 years or so younger than
I am
To return to those Berlin days. As both my parents were working,
we had a maid. At first my mother got an old fashioned person, who
wore long black skirts and an old fashioned black hat tied under the
chin with ribbons. She was apparently a superior cook, everything in
the house shone, but one day my mother returned unexpectedly early
from work, and she found this woman, beating me, because I had messed
up "Here clean floor, by playing on it.
Mother dismissed her on the spot. She phoned around, and that
very same day she found Betty. Betty was a country girl, very fat, not
very clean. The only food she cooked well was pot roast, because she
liked it, Mother taught me that people only cook well the food they
like. Betty's vegetables were drowned in water. Dishes were left in
the kitchen for 24 hours until the next morning, BUT she and I became
the best of friends. She was so good with me, that Mother put up with
all the rest of her shortcomings, because Betty was a better
pedagogue than any of her colleagues at school, and was good for
me.
When my parents went out at night, which they frequently did,
Berlin being at that time a very intellectual city, with lots of
concerts, shows etc. going on, I was allowed to sit up late with Betty.

=== page 0023 ===
I sat on the kitchen table, combing Betty's hair, pretending to
be a hairdresser, and I dare say, we both enjoyed ourselves.
Each week, Betty bought a housekeepers magazine from a chemist
on the other side of the road. What interested me was that it
contained a puzzle drawing which you had to turn around and over to
find a hidden shape, like the gamekeepers dog, or the children's
ball, I was looking forward to that each week. One day Betty said she
was too busy to get the magazine, would I get it for her? The trouble
was, that I was scared stiff of going into the street on my own, I was
afraid of the wicked boys lurking there to beat little girls up.
However I wanted the magazine so much, that I went, And that was what
Betty had wanted. She wanted me to find a motivation to go down to the
shop. Later in the day I heard her and my mother talking this over,
and my mother was quite surprised that I had really ventured out
alone, and expressed her admiration to Betty.
I know this is supposed to be a chapter about my mother, but I
think this is a good opportunity to remember a wonderful person.
My father in those days was a rather left-wing socialist, and he
wanted me to see that not everybody lived in a comfortable condition
like we did. So he sent me with Betty to see her family, who lived in
what was then called in Berlin, a back-court house. You had to walk
through the arch of a rather pompous looking front house, walk
through the courtyard, and came to a poorer dwelling.
Betty's brother, I think it was, lived with his family in a
ground floor flat without electricity. They had one room, a small
kitchen and a bathroom, all very dark and dingy. For the first time
in my life I saw that people had a bed in their living room. It wasn't
just a sofa, It was a heavy wooden large bed with a white lacy cotton
bedspread. They lit a petrol lamp, the first one I ever saw, in the
early afternoon, because it got dark there very early.
I remember one day a few young people were dancing in that room
to the tune of a grammophone in spite of all the furniture, and one
girl sat down on a pile of records!!! but everybody laughed. Just a
few were broken, and everybody repeated the German proverb" Broken
bits bring luck.
In the flat next to them lived a girl, a little older than I was,
and she came over to play with me, when we visited. I was told her
mother left her alone most of the day, and she was happy to have some
company. One day I saw the mother on her way out. She was rather plump
and what I thought, very elegantly dressed, and had a lot of make up
on her face, which was something not done in those days by the women
of my parents friends and family.
Of course in those days, I did not know what that woman was. I
only wondered why she left her poor daughter at home alone, and went
out gorgeously dressed. I suppose the fact that I was playing with a
prostitutes daughter was certainly kept, maybe from my parents, and
certainly from my two grandmothers who would surely have had blue
fits.
One day the visits, which had not been frequent anyway, ceased
completely, and I overheard a how Betty told my parents, that her
nephew Willy, had been taken to a concentration camp, because he was
communist. He was never heard of again.
Betty had a fiance whose name was Karl Karl was mostly out of
work. The unemployment in Germany at that time was horrendous, and it
was the basis for the Nazi regime's success, as they provided work for
the people. Betty and Karl did not have enough money to get married,
and they were in their late 30ies already.

=== page 0024 ===
2
Karl smoked, which nobody in our family did, and he gave me film
star's pictures from the cigarette boxes. I thought these film stars
were absolutely gorgeous, and remember particularly admiring Lilian
Harvey.
When in 1933 our household broke up, Betty had to leave us.
Apparently my mother kept up a correspondance with her. We heard,
that poor Karl, had died from a burst appendix, and poor Betty was
left alone in the world. In her last letter, before the war she wrote
to my mother, how hard it had been for her, after we left. She never
found a good place, I suppose she was too old, too slow, not very
tidy, and people did not have the courage to confide their children to
her, as my mother had done. Or maybe such an opportunity had never
repeated itself. She was working on a farm when she wrote her last
letter, and was deeply unhappy having to work with animals, which she
hated. But it was the only job she could find. And after the war, we
never heard from her again, I hope life had not been too bad for her in
her old age, but with the war in Germany you can never tell. She was a
great lady, and she, like many other good people had deserved a better
fate. At least as long as I live, she will live on in my memory, and I
do think of her with love.
While we were living in Berlin, my mother and I visited her
parents for the Easter and Christmas holidays. On one occasion, at
Christmas, she gave me my first experience in classical music. My
grandparents had a sumptuous gramophone in a cabinet. Mother put on
Mendelssohn's "Overture to the Midsummer's Night. Dream". She
explained to me about the fairies dancing, about the rough people
trying to stage a play, about Titania falling in love with bottom,
about Puck skipping about in the woods, doing mischief, and how you
could hear it in the music. From that time on, I became interested in
classical music. My mother had made a very clever choice in
introducing me to it with a piece I could visualise, Also I loved to
dance to the music. So my mother made me a lovely costume of yellow
crepe paper with a long skirt, and a blonde wig of some artificial
stuff, and on New Year's Eve I danced in that costume to the
"Midsummer Night's overture in front of the family.
Later I found a book in my grandmother's bookcase about the "Young
Beethoven" and another one about Mozart. They were pretty kitschy.
but I loved them. I also found a game of cards called quartet, about
poets and writers. Each writer had 4 cards with all the relevant
dates written on them, and during the game you had to assemble as many
writers as possible. To my dismay I found out that poor Shakespeare
had died on his birthday!! The poor man. And what about all those
presents his family had bought for him. He could not enjoy them any
more, I was very shocked.
Also, there were very large albums with beautiful coloured
The
pictures telling the stories of operas and various dramas.
pictures had benn collected by my mother and her brother when they
were children. They came together with tins of "Libby's Meat Extract
whatever that was. In this way I was introduced to Classical Opera
and Drama.
Moreover, my grandfather in his youth, had collected the works
Goethe and Schiller, which came in regular installments of
of
collected all the leaflets they were
leaflets. When you had
opulently bound in gold embossed covers. This edition of Goethe and
Schiller was richly illustrated, and I just loved the pictures, and
as I wanted to know what was going on, I read as much as I could
understand of the contents, and became quite learned.

=== page 0025 ===
82
During the summer holidays mother and I went on trips, with my
grandparents, I remember the beach at Knocke in Belgium where I rode
on a donkey with a sheepskin for a saddle. We went to the Black Forest
where the women wore gorgeous costumes with white aprons and flat
strawhats with three red pompoms on them. We stayed at a hotel on the
edge of a forest. The owners of the hotel had a little dachshund,
named Rascal, who loved to take walks with us. He also took walks on
his own. One day he came home shot in the ear, by some hunters or the
gamekeeper and my grandfather treated him for the wound
I remember going to Switzerland to a place on the Lake of
Lucerne, called Seligsberg, And when I returned to Seligsberg 30
years later, they still had the same black and yellow striped boating
houses on the shore. You would think nothing ever changed in
Switzerland. It is a comforting thought, and the Swiss should be a
happy people having been spared two atrocious wars, but they are not.
They complain like everybody else. We went to the Glacier of the Rhone
which impressed me for life. My father always stayed home, because he
had to work.
Life went on like that until 1933. My mother lost her job, to
the great sorrow of the headmaster of the school where she worked. He
was obliged to dismiss her, who was one of his best teachers. It must
be said in honour, that he was a decent person who felt deeply ashamed
about this racist situation.
My mother found a job at a Jewish school, but she found it very
hard, because of the total lack of discipline in that school. The
atmosphere was totally different to a German school. She also became
a private tutor to some Jewish girls, and was appalled at the way
these children were pampered at home, being served on hand and foot
and their every whim catered to.
Then my father had leave Berlin in the very clothes he stood in,
because the Nazis sought him as a suspected communist. He went to
Paris where he had French cousins. My Mother was left all alone in
this dreadful climate to sort things out. We were lucky that the
Nazis did not retaliate on the families of persons they were after, as
they later did. I was sent to Elberfeld to my grandparents, while
mother cancelled the lease on our flat, packed, and sold part of the
furniture. It was at that occasion that her back started to become
very bad from physical exertion. It must have been a dreadful time for
her, her only help stemming from her unusual courage and rational
thinking.
Then she went to Paris to be with my father. They lived in a
shabby hotel, trying to find work, an impossible task, as foreigners
were not given work permits. The unemployment situation was just as
bad in France as it was in Germany. They lived from money sent by my
grandparents, and from the charity of my father's French cousins.
Somehow they managed to be able to rent a flat, in a Paris
suburb, in Sevres. There was a downtown Sevres, with shops, churches
and Sunday markets. When you came out of that centre, and walked up a
very steep hill you came to the residential quarter. We lived on top
of the hill in the "Rue da la Justice" (The street of justice) The
houses in that street were all 2 or 3 floors high and mostly private
homes in very large gardens, surrounded by high walls. There were
also some more modest dwellings, and that is where we lived. The house
had once been a one family house, and was divided into flats. The
landlords lived on the ground floor. We had a flat on the second floor
on the right, and on the opposite side of the landing lived a young
couple, called Tessier.

=== page 0026 ===
23
Mr. Tessier worked on the Metro (underground or subway). He was
the man who blew the whistle for the train to start after everybody
had got in. Madame Tessier worked as a cleaning lady. They had a
radio, which we had not, and you could hear it sometimes through the
thin wall between the two flats, playing current hits, which I
loved.
Our flat consisted of a large sunny room facing the huge back
garden. In that room were two sofa-beds for my parents, our Berlin
kitchen table with some chairs, and my father's desk. On one wall
there was a fireplace, but my parents had put a cast iron stove into
it, for better heat, You could boil water, and roast chestnuts on its
top, and see the lovely red glowing coals through a small door with a
mica window. In winter my mother put a red glazed brick on top of the
stove. This became red hot, and was wrapped in a thick piece of
flannel, which became quite singed over the years, and was placed at
the foot of the bed to keep your feet warm. The stove was the only
heating we had, until the landlord put in central heating just one
year before we left. At the rear end of the large room, was a tiny room
with just space enough for a sofa bed and a chair. That is where I
slept in winter, because it was warm.
On the other side of the corridor was another room with a bed and
a wardrobe, both from the Berlin bedroom, in lovely Art Nouveau style
furniture, done in body varnish the colour of ivory. Wouldn't I give
my eye teeth to have inherited them, as was done in an orderly world.
But the world has been torn out of its order (except for the
Swiss world, where material things don't change) and we must cope as
best as we can. This room faced the street, and that is where I slept
in summer, and not in winter, because it had no heating. I remember
sitting on the window sill, leaning on the iron window guard (French
windows are very long, and stop nearly at the floor, and have these
beautiful cast iron guards) dreaming of a glorious future, as very
young girls do.
Between the rooms was a narrow corridor leading from the front
door. At the end of the corridor was the kitchen. As there was no
bathroom, and my mother refused to wash in the sink, a wash basin was
installed in one free corner of the kitchen, and a screen put in front
of it, so that one could wash in privacy
The toilet was outside on the landing. It had two bolts to lock
the door. One was for the day, another one was for the night. It lit
the light at the same time you bolted the door. There was no other
light switch. A typical French invention. The French are quite
ingenious at inventing gadgets and money and labour saving devices.
In this case, you could never forget to switch the light off, when you
left the toilet. Very clever
As you can read, this flat was a bit of a comedown to what my
parents were used to. In those days I was too young to wonder about
what was going on in my parents' minds. I knew, we were poor, and
resented it somewhat. But my lovely parents did everything to make my
life as normal to me as possible. They obtained a free place in a
marvelous (but very expensive) Montessori School. We went on
wonderful walks in a nearby glorious wood with a lake, the same lake
where the famous French painter, Camille Corot (1796-1875) had his
house, and painted his enchanting pictures. Every Sunday when the
entrance was free to museums, and parks we went to the Paris museums
and to Versailles, which gave me quite an education.
But I wonder what went on in the heads of my parents, reduced to
the state of being unemployed, in spite of their magnificent
qualifications and be dependent on the charity of their cousins?

=== page 0027 ===
24
My father had an enormous buoyancy to his nature, an unlimited
optimism, and never lost his sense of humour, even in the worst
situation. His motto was: Never give up. "Just go on."
But my mother? What upheld her was probably my father's constant
unwavering optimism, good humour, courage and cheerfulness, and of
course her own rare intelligence, and the daily routine of life.
My mother's cousin Emmy (Dodo's mother also lived in Paris. She
was married to a German gentile who worked for a large German Chemical
Industry (IG Farben) in Paris, They lived in a beautiful flat in
Paris, and we were frequently invited. We were also invited to my
father's various 3 cousins. One was Rene Schiff, married to a
Rumanian lady, Lilly, who stood out because she overdid her make-up
in flamboyant colours. Rene was a dealer in pearl, like most of the
Schiff brothers. They lived in a real old fashioned Parisian
flat with a dining room going out at the back to a dark courtyard.
All the front rooms, and there were many, ran into each other,
Parisian style, so that all the important rooms were looking out into
the street. Everything was furnished Rococo style, which I thought
wonderful. We were there quite frequently for lunches.
Sometimes there were other members of the family there too with
children, I remember one particular afternoon when there was a little
girl there, younger than myself, who took me by the hand and explored
all the rooms without any inhibition, which I thought strange. In the
bedroom, she found a box on a bedside table with small balls of all
colours of the rainbow, "Oh, bonbons "(sweets) she said, and stuffed
a couple into her mouth. She nearly choked, and spat them out quickly,
because the were glass balls!!
Another cousin was Arlette, a lady of great vivacity and charm,
just married to Jean Tromeur, an interior architect. He was a self
educated man who had risen to his profession from being a Breton
country lad. I remember how once over lunch, which he liked to cook
himself, he told us, how as a child when he had first come into a house
with stairs, he went up on all fours, because he had only be used to
ladders. At the time we were in Paris, Janick was born, and I remember
her as a new born baby
Another cousin was Suzanne who lived on her own, after having
been divorced from her German Jewish husband. Her flat had been
designed by Jean Tromeur, her brother in law. It was a dream of a
modern flat all done in sky blue.
Various other Jewish refugees used to turn up at our house. Some
very hard up indeed, others seems to be a little better off,
were
In 1938 my father saw that not only was life hopeless in Paris,
but the signs of a world war were on the horizon, and this time the
Jews would have to pay for it particularly dearly, although I dare say
some people suffered just as much. Anyway, my father decided to get
out of France, which he rightly thought would be overrun by the
Germans. He did not like the English, something he later came to
change his mind about, so the only place he could think of was what
was then Palestine.
If a person who wished to emigrate to Palestine had 1000 Marks,
he could get on a list to get a certificate of entry. My parents were
as poor as churchmice. My father had various Zionist, connections
from his younger days, when he had been a member of the Jewish Labour
Party together with such personalities as Chaim Arlosorof. He tried
to get their help which took ages, and umpteen letters of refusal, All
these letters I found in a huge file after my mother's death. They
made the most awful depressing reading. Nothing but refusals.

=== page 0028 ===
85
All doors were shut. It must have been terrible for my parents.
Among others, my father got in touch with Nahum Goldman, a great,
outstanding Zionist. It was thanks to Nahum Goldman that we got into
Palestine, and he got my father a job at the Betsalel Museum of Art, I
shall write more about that in the chapter on my father, and also more
about his relatives.
My father went on ahead to Jerusalem and once more my mother was
left to clear the house on her own. It must have been a terrible time
for her. In spite of all the poverty, she liked living in Sevres. Also
twice a year we, that is to say, my mother and I, travelled to see her
parents. Even in those days it was dangerous, after having emigrated,
to return to Germany. My father was always worried when we went. One
day we were all ready to go, when we heard of a Jewish mother and child
who had been on the train from Paris to Germany, and were arrested on
the border, and never heard of again. So the trip was cancelled
To go to the Middle East, far away, into a completely strange country
must have been very hard for my mother. Maybe she thought she would
never see her parents again. It was a very hard time for my mother to
pack up again, to leave half of her belongings and to head for a
country which some people described perhaps in rosy colours, but
others, more realistically, as a very harsh and difficult place to
live. A country where they spoke a language unknown to her, and of a
extremely hot climate, which she abhorred. Also she had never been a
Zionist, and had no connections to this movement and ideas. The only
things that must have helped her were her wisdom her relatively young
age of 39 her belief and love of my father, and the sensibility of the
idea to escape antisemitism and war, But to have to leave her parents
in this situation, must have been an intolerable thought.
So once more our little bits of furniture were sold, as we were
to get new and more suitable ones in Jerusalem. the rest of the
belongings were packed in a few packing cases. At that time, I was
taken away from school, which was heartbreaking for me, because I
loved it, had friends there, and felt marvelously at home there. It
was a very traumatic experience for me, and one which I probably never
got quite over, I lodged for a week or so with Emmy and Dodo, and then,
it was a very cold February, my mother and myself, went by train to
Turin, and from there, I think to Genova where we took a boat, the
"Gerusalemme" to Haifa. The crossing was very rough, I did not feel
too well, which I tried to overcome by writing a novel in a copybook,
Most people were quite seasick, except the captain of the ship and my
mother who promenaded on the deck.
One morning we docked at Haifa port, and looking over the
railing, we saw my father down below, waiving to us. This picture is
quite clearly etched in my mind. We went to a restaurant where we had
a vegetarian bake, which was strange to me, and everything else
looked very strange too. The houses, the people were obviously very
different from France. I remember going by bus to Jerusalem, which in
those days was a lengthy trip, the bus groaning all the way uphill,
barely making it, I saw Arab shepherds looking pretty miserable, by
the roadside, Arab villages, looking no better, and the Egged bus
terminal in Jerusalem seemed the craziest place on earth.
As my parents had practically no money, they took a flat,
together with my mother's brother Guenther, and his wife Thea, in
order to economise. Guenther had had a position as a physicist in the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem for a couple of years, and he probably
had quite a decent salary.

=== page 0029 ===
86
My father obtained a position as a curator in the Betsalel
Museum. It had been set up by the Jewish Agency and was housed in a
lovely old style Jerusalem building, which had once been Boris
Schatz's Arts and Crafts School, and its exhibits consisted mostly of
Jewish ritual objects. The Director, Mr.Mordehai Narkiss was an
extremely knowledgable expert in these objects but not an art
historian. There were 2 floors of exhibitions, and the rest of the
rooms were used as storerooms, and there was a huge hangar, which had
been the weaving School, and at the time my father arrived, was full
of junk. Mr. Narkis's father sat at the box office, and his
beautiful, widowed sister, Rikuda, was the secretary. She was quite
a buxom lady, always dressed in very wide skirts, like a Spanish
flamenco dancer, and like these, she had her dark hair piled high in
brilliant curs, and looked altogether very striking. The museum was
really a family affair, except for a man of all jobs, called Ox, who
was generally referred to as "The Old Ox" He claimed to have been a
coachman, and later a tram driver in Vienna. But nobody knew for sure,
and nobody knew how old he really was. He was quite gruff, and comical
in the way he messed up words of foreign origin. His dumpy wife could
sometimes be seen inside the museum with a feather duster which she
used quite ineffectually. In short, it was rather a family affair.
My father had been engaged to turn this one-subject collection
into a real museum, which he did in the course of time, of which I
shall write later, when I come to my father's particular life story.
The salary was very meagree, to put it mildly. Not only that, but in
those days, before unions, in an institution like this one, salary
was withheld as far as possible, I don't know how often my father had
to run to the offices of the Jewish Agency to whom this museum
belonged, and literally had to bang the desks to get what little was
due to him. My father tried to supplement his income by writing
articles, and giving lectures accompanied by slides in private
homes, and later in kibutzim.
Life was very hard indeed, and particularly hard for my mother,
to have to share a flat, and especially a tiny kitchen, where all
cooking was done on kerosene primus stoves, which were quite
efficient, once you had got them going, but were rather like setting
off a rocket, and gave off a terrific heat. For milder cooking there
was the "Silent Louise" a little kerosene cooker with either one or
two wicks. Wicks always had always to be trimmed, and kept clean, and
so had the ducts of the primus stoves, there were no fridges, only ice
boxes. Cooking electric, or buying bottled gas, was very expensive.
So nearly everybody cooked on the "Primus" The kitchen situation
was not only difficult, but was made worse when the first Chamsins
started to appear in May, and then the half year hot season
started. The combined high temperatures, plus the heat from the
cookers, turned the kitchen into an oven and life outside it gave no
relief. My poor mother had a severe depression for the first time in
her life. She could not get out in the heat of the day, it made her
feel awful, and she was crying a lot. She visited a lady doctor whose
name I think was Dr. Rachel Freund, She was always talked about with
great reverence. This lady must have helped her a great deal,
probably with medications and talks. It took my mother probably a
year to get over the worst of her depression. In 1938 my mother's
parents came over to see if they could stay, an event about which I
have already written in the chapter about my grandparents. Their
Then war broke out in 1939, and my
departure was another blow.
grandparents were trapped. So what tiny shred of comfort was left?

=== page 0030 ===
Somehow during those years my mother slowly pulled herself
together with the help of her own wisdom, the life enhancing presence
of my father, the proximity of her much beloved brother, and the
duties of every day life.
She helped my father to prepare the slides for his lectures.
In those days, you did not have the film slides with little
projectors of our days. My father had a huge projector in a battered
old suitcase, which he carried around for his lectures. For the
slides, he photographed illustrations from books. He did the dark¬
room work himself, turning the kitchen into a dark-room.
He printed the photographs onto 10 cms square glass slides. The
sensitive side of the glass, with the print on, had to be protected
with a plain glass. In order to stick them together, special paper
tape was stuck to all 4 edges of the double glass. This was a job for
my mother, and sometimes I helped her with it. Altogether, my father
accumulated 100dreds of those slides, and later a cabinet maker, made
a special cabinet for them. After my father's death, it all went to
the Haifa Museum, where they are probably mouldering away, as in our
high-tech age, they are unfortunately of no use to anybody.
In Jerusalem, my parents met again with the artist, Mordehai
Ardon, who had been a friend of my father from the Berlin days. At
that time he had been an actor and a photographer, but in Palestine he
slowly developed into a world famous artist. Another artist of my
parent's circle was Leopold Krakauer, Elka, for short, just using the
initials. He was a great architect, who brought imagination, and
beauty into the drab Bauhaus Style building going on at that time. He
was also a suber draughtsman, drawing the wild, bare Judean
landscape, around Jerusalem. the twisted olive, trees, and the
menacingly beautiful thistles, in black or sepia chalk. He never
used any colour, only once at a special occasion: I had come to
Jerusalem with Ilan, when he was 3 or 4 years old, and Elka fell in
love with him, Ilan was a very dainty child, with a sensitive face,
and very blonde hair, When he smiled, which he did quite often, two
dimples appeared in his cheeks, and people were carried away.
Elka was a very silent person, who rarely spoke. He was friendly,
smiling, but introvert. But he took Ilan on his knee, and asked him if
he could draw anything for him. Ilan promptly asked him to draw a man
on a tractor, which Elka did in blazing colours. He also drew an
animal for him in colours, and Elka's wife, his daughter Trude, and
his mother could not get over the fact that he actually drew in
These drawings are now with Trude Dotan, who is an
colours!!!
archaeologist. And quite by the way, I would like to remember here
Elka's mother, who had managed to come to Palestine before the war
from Vienna. She was a very small, round old lady, with her pure
white hair done up in a bun at the top. She was always in a house
dress, and apron, cooking and baking a lot. She spoke in a lovely
Viennese accent, and like any true Viennese, she dressed up every
afternoon in her best clothes, and went to the "Kaffee-House, in
Rambam Street.
Elka's wife, Grete was also a painter, quite academic in style.
she was a good painter, but nothing as special as her husband. She
gave me my first drawing lessons, which were a bit boring, but
probably quite useful. Being a free lance architect and artist was
not lucrative in those days, so Grete supplemented the family's
income by sewing sheepskin slippers with the wool inside, to keep
the wearer's feet warm As she had more work than she could manage, she
passed some of the sewing work on to my mother. It was badly paid, but
it brought in some money.

=== page 0031 ===
It was hard work, as the leather was pretty tough. I remember
helping my mother, by tying up the end bits of cotton, after she had
sewn the seams on the machine, and embroidering around those external
seams with coloured cotton in a kind of cross stitch.
My mother tried to learn Hebrew, but she had difficulty reading
the characters. Her eyesight had never been very good. She had
astigmatism, and it was very hard for her to see the difference
between "Dalet" and "Resh", "Samech" and "Mem" and so on. Later in
her life, when times were less hard, when she was no longer pressed
with tough jobs, and a difficult life-style, she continued to teach
herself Hebrew. She could write quite nicely. Her handwriting was
extremely beautiful and regular anyway, showing her inner harmony.
Her Hebrew letters were absolute calligraphy. And although she could
never understand rapid-fire Hebrew, she manged to make herself
understood, if necessary. Especially by the various cleaning ladies
that passed through her life.
It must be said however that the Hebrew of the cleaning ladies was
pretty primitive in those days too. In the thirties and forties most
people came from abroad, and Hebrew was elementary, except from those
who had been brought up on it, and which were probably just about half
of the population I remember however, that once when I visited my
mother in the late seventies or early eighties, I found her on the
phone, having let myself into the flat with my key, and to my
surprise, she was speaking fluent Hebrew to someone. I cannot
remember ever having been so surprised in my whole life, I think, she
did not let on that she could speak Hebrew when necessary, because she
never liked the language, and thought it utterly ridiculous that
modern Hebrew was not spelt in Latin characters, to make it easier for
all Europeans, and other nationalities to understand, the way the
Turks had latinised their alphabet.
To return to the early days in Jerusalem in the late thirties: My
mother knew she would never teach at school again, because of the
language and also because of the very rough tone and manners of the
population, which were so different from what she had been used to,
and which did not make things easier. However after I had started
studying privately for my London Matriculation, in about 1940, she
saw, an opening there, and started giving private mathematics
lessons, in either English or German.
Although my mother had never learnt any cooking, because her
mother, who had really been an excellent cook, who could turn out a
meal, preserves, cakes and biscuits like a professional chef, did not
tolerate any one in the kitchen, except the maid fordoing the menial
jobs. She never taught her daughter anything about cooking. So when
my mother had to do her own cooking in the Paris days, and later in
Jerusalem, she taught herself. She told me it was "easy" because she
had studied chemistry. She became quite a super cook herself, and she
taught me. Our styles were different, but although I am now talking
about myself, I know that I am a pretty good cook too. My father loved
both my mother's and my cooking, and never failed to remark about our
different styles, It was in those Jerusalem days, when my mother was
really not well, that I got my first cooking lessons. My mother was
lying down, and told me exactly what to do. I went into the kitchen,
did what she said, and came back to her sofa. pot and wooden spoon in
hand, and asked her, if this was right? So I learned cooking and
baking, and really enjoyed doing it, and was able to help my mother at
the same time.

=== page 0032 ===
Here I have to insert another personal remark; I learnt cooking
from my mother, but cleaning from a young Kurdish girl who was one of
our many "Oserot" (Cleaning ladies.) My parents and my aunt and uncle
always had a cleaning lady, they came and went for various reasons. If
they were orientals they usually came as young girls, got married,
had children, and vanished. Once we had one German girl who was very
nice. She always had lunch with us, and insisted on doing the dishes
afterwards for "Free. It was not so free after all, for after lunch,
when she was on her own in the kitchen, she pinched some of my aunt
Thea's silver, and it being wartime, she pinched some of our reserves
of sugar, flour, and even kerosene; which she siphoned off in bottles,
from a gerry can! One day my aunt managed to catch her "In flagranti
and the poor girl broke down, saying that she was getting married, and
needed some money. My aunt told her, she would forget about the whole
thing, provided she brought the silver, cutlery back. She never
returned, but her rather horrified fiance came instead, returning
everything, and saying that she must be a kleptomaniac. In spite of
this they eventually got married.
This Kurdish girl was an orphan living with her relations. She
was illiterate, and unfortunately very ugly. But the way she
systematically cleaned the flat was a work of art, and I learnt from
her by observing her. One day she started coming in very beautiful
dresses, telling us that she was being fitted out for her marriage.
She had never seen her future husband. It was an arranged marriage
The only thing she knew about him was, that he was a street porter. In
those days street porters were sitting on the curb near the Central
Bus station, and other places where they were likely to get work. My
aunt The had long talks with her, because she quite rightly thought,
that the girl was being trapped into something. She offered her to get
her a place in the Beth Ha-Chaluzot (Pioneer Women Institution) where
she would learn to read and write, and also learn a trade, but the
girl was afraid to do that. It would have meant never to see her
family again. So she got married, and appeared on our doorstep the
night after her wedding, beaten black and blue by her husband. My aunt
put her up for the night, but otherwise there was not much she could
do for her.
She continued to work for a while, Her husband continued to beat
her up, and run after other women. She stopped coming before her first
child was born, Years later we met her in the street. She was now
dressed in Kurdish costume. She had several of her children with her.
She said, that her husband was now a lorry driver. She could hardly
have been more than thirty, but she looked an old woman, with wisps of
grey hair escaping from under her turban. There had always been a
special look in her very dark eyes. A look of knowledge blended with
pity and patience, I know that this paragraph does not exactly relate
to our history, but I feel I would like to remember her in those few
lines, as she was an unusual character, and I always wondered what
kind of life she would have led, if she had been able to accept my
aunts offer of freedom.
As the years went by, and my father started to turn the Betsalel
Museum into a real museum, my parents became more and more involved in
the Jerusalem social life, which consisted mostly in their case of
German Jews like ourselves, who were called by East European Jews
"Yekkes". Nobody knows what that meant. Some said, it was because
Jews from Germany came to the country wearing short jackets. Others
said, it was an acronym of the Hebrew "Yehudi Kashe Havana" which
menas a Jew who was of slow understanding. There really was this very
fundamental difference between German Jews, and East European Jews.

=== page 0033 ===
30
The latter, were certainly more, nimble, in everything:
Understanding, knowing Hebrew, knowing lots of tricks, being very
handy, and also in quite a lot of cases, not minding doing crooked
tricks, because of the conditions they had lived in Eastern Europe,
where this was the only means of survival. All these things were
naturally completely detestable to German Jews, who were dreadfully
upright and stiff, in the best German tradition, which was not
Of course these are
suitable any more to the new conditions.
generalisations, but for a time, especially during the great wave of
German immigration, there was a certain contempt of each other
between those two groups, especially among the less cultured classes
of society while the better educated people got along quite nicely
I know this sounds all very sobbish, but that
with each other.
However, this state of affairs gradually smoothed
was the reality.
itself out over the years.
There is another story which I would like to insert here. In
Berlin I went to a Kindergarden where there was another Jewish girl
called Lucy Serebriskip. Her parents had immigrated from Lodz in
Poland. Her mother was from Lodz, and her father was a pianist from
Russia. He played in cafes and gave piano lessons. Lucy and myself
became great friends, and our mothers met when they picked us up after
school, and became very friendly too, and soon my parents and Lucy's
parents met socially as well.
I remember one frightening incident which happened to Lucy. The
Kindergarden was on a second floor, and had a long outdoor stairs,
leading into the garden. One day Lucy missed the top step, and rolled
down the whole long flight of stairs sideways, and got up at the
bottom, crying, but totally unhurt. It was a dreadful sight, which is
forever photographed into my mind.
Lucy and myself continued to go to school together. She was
highly intelligent, and a good pupil, and she was somehow very
knowledgeable. I remember in particular one conversation we had on
our way home from school. We talked about how dreadful wars must be,
and how lucky we were not to be in one. Lucy said; "There is no war on
here now, but there is a war on. You just don't know about it. It is in
China, There is a war on in China!" She said it quite triumphantly, as
if to show that I was just a poor innocent.
By the time we went to Paris, the Serebriski family had gone back
to Lodz. My mother corresponded with them for a while, and then for
In 1937, about half a year, after our
some reason lost touch.
immigration to Jerusalem, my father came home from work, and
said: "You never guess, who I met in Ben Yehudah Street." Of course we
never guessed. He had met Mrs. Serbriski!! They had come to Jerusalem
a few months ago, just like ourselves, and Mr. Serebriski had found a
job as a pianist in the Cafe Vienna, on the corner of Kikar Zion (Zion
Square). It was a fabulous reunion for all of us. They lived right
in the middle of town, in no. Ben Yehuda street, on the 8th floor, in
a tiny roof apartment overlooking the roof of the Zion Cinema, and the
distant hills around the city.
I don't know if I mentioned it, but our flat was at the end of
Gaza Road, the last house in the street, and quite at the edge of the
Rehavia quarter, where most of the Yekkes lived, some in apartments
like ourselves, and others, who were well off, in houses of their own.
We really lived at the end of the city. From our garden, we could see
the minaret of the Arab village of Malkha, and a little nearer to us,
the Monastery of the Valley of the Cross. About 10 minutes walk down
the road, was a small round tower for a guard, but there never was a

=== page 0034 ===
guard there, and a few paces on was a handsome, but solitary house
with flats, built by an Armenian. The house was called Beth Chanania.
In those days, houses in Jerusalem not only had numbers, but names as
well. We lived in a Beth Lapidoth, so called, because the name of
My parents had friends in one of the
the landlord was Lapidoth.
apartments of the Beth Chanania. It was the Kahana family. Dr. Peter
Kahana was an archaeologist. He was a very interesting and extremely
but to
erudite man, and a very amusing conversationalist,
everybody's embarassment he treated his wife like a servant. Yet she
was one of the nicest women one could think of, She did not have a
higher education, and that is probably why he treated her the way he
did. He despised people who had no higher education. Yet his wife had
She was not
always been his secretary, and that was how they met.
Jewish, and she was a real German housewife, and an excellent mother,
and altogether a much nicer personality than he was, in spite of his
being so extremely well educated and knowledgable.
So we really lived at the edge of the city, and some people were
too frightened to come and see us at night. Nowadays, this bit of Gaza
Road, if it still called that, and the Beth Chanania are swallowed
up in a huge modern quarter, and quite difficult to locate.
The area where we lived was called Kiryat Shmuel. If I remember
correctly, during the days of the British Mandate, Jerusalem was
divided into areas, which were governed by a Jewish council, who
collected the money for elctricity and water. Unfortunately the
Kiriat Shmuel council was nothing but an assembly of religious
rogues. They collected the money for the services, but they never
handed it to the authorities. So that quite frequently we were left
without water or electricity. My father who was the fighter in the
family, and a few like-minded citizens, had to storm the Council, and
get them to pay what they owed the electric and water companies.
Of course these difficulties did not make life easier. Our
landlord, Mr. Lapidoth was another small time crook. We had central
heating in the house, which was included in the rent, I think. Now Mr.
Lapidoth did not like to pay for the heating oil, so he quietly went
into the boiler room, which was accessible from outside the house,
and sabotaged the boiler, so it could not work. Then it usually took
ages for someone to come and repair it, while we froze around smelly
kerosene stoves. But I seem to remember that one day all the tenants
of the house put a stop to this activity, by paying themselves for the
heating oil.
Those were but a few aspects of the difficulties of life in
Jerusalem in those days, which did not make life easier, and which
caused quite a lot of stress. Also, the period I am talking about,
were the years between 1937 and the end of World War II. Between 1937
and the start of the War in 1939, there was a great deal of political
unrest in the country, caused mainly by attacks of Arab gangs on
Jewish settlements, buses and institutions. With the outbreak of the
War these unrests stopped. In the Palestine of those days, the war
itself was not felt as such, but people were of course much aware of
it. First and foremost because of the dreadful fate of our people in
Europe, which caused much concern, anguish, and sorrow. Then there
was the presence of the various armies, the British, the Australians,
the Polish Army in Exile. Jewish young people enlisted in the British
Army, the Jewish Brigade was formed. The German army in the Western
Desert caused real concern. We always stored food reserves for
emergency situations, and I remember that trenches were dug in what
is now the Nature Reserve on Mount Carmel, to stop German
tanks!!

=== page 0035 ===
I remember seeing those trenches still in place about the year 1980,
and trees growing out of them. The danger in those days was very
real, and there was immense rejoicing when Field Marshal Montomery
overpowered Rommel and his forces in El Alamein in North Africa, and
thus the dreadful menace of a German invasion of the Middle East came
to nothing, and people breathed easier.
Although families sharing a flat was never easy, it was made
agreeable because all the people involved were civilised, I remember
with great pleasure that every Friday evening we sat in Thea's and
Guenther's living room, which at night was turned into a bedroom, the
sofas being turned into beds, and we listened to the Friday evening
concert on the radio in reverential silence. It was there that I
learned to appreciate classical music. After the concert, my father
and Guenther usually discussed the performances in professional
terms. It was a wonderful ending to a humdrum week. The next morning
we all had breakfast together in the same room. A good Shabat morning
breakfast with toast, boiled egg, and lots of good conversation,
Speaking of concerts; It must have been around that time that
Arturo Toscannini came to Palestine, for the opening of the what is
now the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, a very basic concert hall had
been built in the grounds of the Tel Aviv Exhibition Centre. It was
hard to get a ticket, and probably quite expensive too. My father and
Quenther bought one ticket which they shared. It was not even a proper
seat. It was just sitting on the stairs between the aisles of the
concert hall. My father listened to the first half, went out during
the interval, and handed the ticket to Guenther, who listened to the
second half. They returned home very happy.
In 1942 the long awaited Gabriella was born, and that made
everybody very happy too, I said, long awaited, because The had had
years and years of trying to get pregnant, and finally it worked, so
to speak at the last minute. She was the sweetest, baby, with dark
brown curls and big black eyes. But once there was a terrible time
when she got thypnoid while still being a baby,
The and Guenther
had been holidaying in Nathanya, with Thea's brother Ludwig and his
wife Kaethe, and for some reason Gaby caught the typhoid. The and
Guenther came home in a taxi with Gaby nearly unconscious with a
raging temperature. Quenther was crying. To this day I can never
understand why they did not get her into the nearest hospital in
Natanya. But the situation was so upsetting, and so stressful, and so
miserable altogether, probably no one asked, questions. Gaby, was
kept at home, under the supervision of the excellent pediatrician,
Dr. Engel (Dr. Angel, which he really was) But apparently in those
days, nothing much could be done except wait. We had very anxious days
waiting, but finally, Gaby overcame the crisis, and recovered quite
fast, if I remember correctly. What a relief!!!
I remember we all went for our regular anti-typhoid shots once
year. So I don't understand why Gaby got the typhoid at all.
As I have mentioned earlier there was peace between Jews, and
Arabs during world War II. In those days, an elderly Arab, selling
es
came every week from the nearby village of Malkha, whose
minaret tower over the hills in a northwesterly direction, we could
see from our garden. After we had become regular customers, and got
acquainted, he brought his wife with him. She was a lovely young
woman. One week later, she again came with her husband, and brought my
mother a sweet little nosegay (a small bunch of flowers) because she
thought my mother was sweet. After that, whenever she came, she
brought little nosegays for my mother.

=== page 0036 ===
This was the effect my mother always had on people. They just
loved her at first sight. The same went for children and cats and
dogs. Sometimes my parents were invited to a place where there was an
impossible child, usually misbehaving all over the place. My
mother just talked to it, and it became an "instant" angel
If she visited a place with one of these yapping little dogs
she just talked to it, very gently, as was her wont, and the dog
stopped barking, started wagging its tail, with a very surprised
look on its face, wondering probably, what on earth had happened to
it. If there was a cat in the room, it usually jumped straight on to
my mother's lap. It must have been her beauty and an irradiation of
harmony that attracted every one.
Another Arab who came regularly during those days was a
butcher's messenger boy who delivered meat. It was camel meat, and
it was very tasty. His boss had a butcher's shop in the Old City, much
patronised by the non kosher eating Jewish population, His meat was
good and cheap. So this butcher got a messenger to make home
deliveries, thereby enlarging his business. It was always came
meat. The messenger spoke broken Hebrew, but quite good German, which
he had probably caught from his German and Yiddish speaking
customers. Whenever he delivered the meat, he also explained in
German what it was.
Today, he would say, "I brought you some very good veal". Or it
would be beasteak, or a chop, or schnitzel. But it was just camel.
Everybody was having a good laugh. And especially the butcher must
have been laughing all the way to the bank. His messenger too, had a
good time. At first he came by bus. After a short time, he came on a
bicycle, and finally he came roaring in, on a powerful motorbike!
A few houses up the road from our house, there was a small stone
bungalow set back in a pretty garden where an Arab baker lived with
his wife and family. He had a large oven, and lots of ladies in the
neighbourhood brought trays of biscuits and cakes which they had
made, to be baked in his oven. Most people did not have a cooker with
an oven. Cakes were baked on the primus in a great invention; called
the Wonder-pot Basically it was a cooking pot with a hole in the
middle to let the heat in. The lid had holes on its rim, to let the air
out. You could bake excellent cakes in it, but it was not suitable for
biscuits of flat fruit tarts. So whoever had ambitions for biscuits
and tarts, brought their tray to the baker. In the afternoon the
baker usually sat on a chair, or stood on the edge of his garden wall,
which was about 2 meters above the pavement. There he sat, a portly,
middle aged gentleman, looking peacefully at the scenery in front of
him, probably cooling off from his hot work in the bakery,
Very, very sadly, as soon as the State of Israel was declared,
and war raged in Jerusalem, he fled with his family. I often wonder
what had become of them. They were peaceful people, very much revered
by their Jewish neighbours, and they like so many others, became
innocent victims of a war which they did not chose to make
Of course, the Old City butcher's messenger stopped roaring on
his beautiful motorbike through the Rehavia quarter where we lived,
and the Arab couple from Malkha disappeared too, as did the whole
village. A saw what had become of the village of Malkha many years
after the war. Neither I nor my parents lived in Jerusalem any more. I
was on a visit, and happened to pass Malka, which had been taken over
by oriental Jewish immigrants. It looked a rather horrible mess, of
old Arab houses with ugly, new and crude concrete additions. I
preferred not to look. It was too sad, and I wondered too what had
become of the egg seller and his lovely wife.

=== page 0037 ===
34
This brings me to the very dreadful events of 1948. At that time,
I was married, living in Givataim, or Shechunat Borochow, as it was
then called, a rural suburb of Tel Aviv. We lived in a tiny, tiny flat
on top of a steep hill. In 1947 my mother came to visit us. As there
was no room for her to stay with us, I had rented a room for her with a
family who lived at the bottom of the hill. The last evening before
her departure, I said good bye to her in the stair entrance of the
house she stayed in. As I left, I turned to wave to her, as she was
standing silhouetted against the light in the entrance. She waved
back, and I had a strange feeling, that it would be a long time before
we would ever see each other again. And so it was.
This is not the occasion to repeat what happened politically in
the years 1947/8. I also do not remember it very clearly, as it was
all very complicated, and the situation was changing from day to day.
Others will do better at describing this than I could. Suffice it
say, that there was again terrible bloodshed between Arabs, Jews, and
the British authorities, over what was going to happen. The British
Mandate was about to expire, and endless plans were put forth what to
do with Palestine. The British Government unfortunately sided with
the Mufti, a great friend of Hitler!! The Jewish population had been
promised a homeland by the Balfour Declaration. And the Arabs
thought it would be a child’s game to drown all the Jews in the sea. Of
course it was not as simple as that,
However, in those days, when the Arabs tried to annihilate us,
the British stood aside, and did nothing to prevent them from doing
so. At the same time the right wing Irgun Tzvai Leumi were fighting
the British with bomb attacks and shootings. So life became quite
dangerous in Jerusalem. My father, who during the years of the
World War had become quite friendly with cultured, and well educated
Englishmen, as had many other Jews, later always told me: The English
are ever so nice, but BEWARE of the British Foreign Office. They are
nothing but a gang of ruthless and greedy bandits". Considering
their records throughout history, absolutely agree with him
The situation was so grave, that one could not drive around the
city boundaries of Jerusalem any more except in armoured vehicles.
As the Jewish population had no such vehicles, ordinary buses were
armour plated. These buses drove regularly up to the "Har Hatsofim
(Mount Scopus) where the Hebrew University, and the new big and
modern Hadassah Hospital were, to carry up doctors nurses, and
University staff.
At the beginning of April, a band of Irgun svai Leumi (ETSEL)
had ravaged an Arab village, called Dir Yassin, as a retribution for
something the Arabs had done. Unfortunately, they behaved like
savages. The killed every one in the village, old people, women and
children in a barbarous manner. After this bloody deed, the Arabs
were only too ready to retaliate.
On Friday, the 13th of April 1948 a convoy of armoured buses, on
the way to the "Har Hatsofim" passed through the Arab quarter called
Sheik Jerrakh, where a huge gang of Arabs ambushed the convoy, and let
loose a barrage of fire, killing most of the passengers in those
armoured buses, whose armoured plates were powerless against such an
onslaught. On a hill overlooking this slaughter, a detachment or
whatever of British soldiers stood observing the carnage, not
lifting a finger. Among the dead was Guenther, who had been on his
way to work
Another victim was Mr. Kramer, a retired business man, who had
been working as a business manager in the Betsalel Museum for several
years, and who lived on the 3rd floor, in the same house as we did.

=== page 0038 ===
35
He had travelled to the Hadassah Hospital to visit his sick
daughter there. When the dreadful news spread in town, my father
rushed to where the dead were laid out, and identified Guenther. He
had been shot through the head. The family doctor who my father
consulted, assured him, that Guenther probably had not suffered.
That death had been instantaneous. But what had the victims suffered
before and during the attack we shall never know. Mr. Kramer's body
was never found, and his widow and his daughter had not even a grave
to mourn over.
At that time I lived in Borohov, as I had mentioned before. I
happened to visit my grandmother who lived with her daughter Alice
and her son-in-law Kurt in Tel Aviv. They had the the English
newspaper called the "Palestine Post", now called the "Jerusalem
Post". I was reading it, and reading about the ambush, and reading
the list of victims, in very tiny print, and my eyes caught the last
name on the list. Dr. Gideon Wolfsohn! Nobody ever called my uncle
Gideon, to my knowledge, but this was disturbing, I told Kurt, and as
not everybody had a phone in those days, he went to someone who had,
and phoned who knows who? and came home with the dreadful message that
the devastating news was true. I could not even get in touch with my
parents, except by letter. My father replied, telling me most of the
things, which I have just described, and ended by saying that they had
buried Guenther in the Cemetery of Sanhedrin, on a beautiful day in
trees, blossoming and the birds singing
spring, with the
overhead.
I do not wish to go into the details of the family's grief. It is
obvious, and a description seems to me like a tasteless piece of
indiscretion. Enough, if I say that even as I am writing this, tears
fill my eyes, 48 years after the event. All my dear ones are forever
with me, but especially those who perished by a murderous hand.
One wonders how life can go on after that, But it does in spite
of immense grief, and I really don't know how everyone went on after
this dreadful blow. I was not in Jerusalem. I could not even go there,
as the city was besieged, very shortly after the Declaration of the
Founding of the State of Israel, in May 1948. People in Jerusalem
went through hell in every respect. No water supply, no electricity,
hardly any food, and attacks from the enemy from all sides. Not only
did the family have to cope with grief and loss, they had to endure
the dreadful hardships of a siege. This is supposed to be a chapter
about my mother, but of course, external events cannot be ignored.
How she endured all this, is quite amazing. Perhaps because my
parents had to look after Thea and Gaby quite a lot during that time,
it kept them going, especially my mother. She had a responsibility.
But she became very ill because of the food shortage. She had always
been very thin and frail, and really had no reserves. The food
shortage was so severe that they went into the fields and cooked wild
spinach, As there was no fuel, they built a sort of hearth with bricks
in the garden, and cooked their food over a fire made from twigs.
As the family lived on the ground floor of the house, the flat
served as a shelter for all the tenants. A huge wall was erected in
front of the entrance door, and at night, all the inhabitants of the
house crowded into the flat with makeshift bedding to get a bit of
sleep. There was a huge water storage tank in the kitchen, and another
one was had been erected in the garden, but now they had to rely on
ambulant water distribution, as the taps were permanently empty.

=== page 0039 ===
36
In Jerusalem, under siege, times were undescribably hard for
everyone. There was a war on, around the borders of the country, a few
bombs even landed in Tel Aviv and its vicinity, and a few stray
bullets popped up, even in our neighborhood, and one even came
through our roof, but got stuck in the ceiling. But at least we were
free to come and go, and had enough to eat, as well as water and
electricity. My husband Uri was drafted into the army, with no salary
coming forth for the time being, I lost my job, as a handweaver, and
became a cleaning lady, literally living from hand to mouth, but that
was nothing compared to what my parents went through in Jerusalem. I
felt very anxious and worried. In the meantime I had become pregnant,
replacing a lost life with a new one, so I did not have to join the
army.
Finally a day arrived, when the army had managed to build a
footpath through Jewish held territory into Jerusalem, called the
Burma Road, apparently because a similar one had been constructed
under similar circumstances in Burma. Able-bodied men, among them,
my cousin Erwin, were walking up this tortuous mountain path,
carrying sacks of food and medicines on their backs for
the
population of Jerusalem. Each person in Israel was allowed to send
one shoe box full of food to their besieged family. It was one box
per family, and I remember putting in carrots, flour, salt, egg
powder, and maybe something else. I was so happy I could do something.
Very soon Jerusalem was liberated, peace negotiations started, which
were tense nad nerve racking, and the State of Israel could finally go
ahead, but at what a cost in human life!!!!
My parents came to see us, as soon as possible, and it was a
happy reunion. My mother looked alright, and the fact that a baby was
to be born, made everything cheerful, But she had nearly starved to
death, because of the totally unsuitable food, which she could not
tolerate, Friends had given up their rations of a bit better quality
food, to help her, and she was fit enough to sew a maternity dress for
me, from a material which I had woven, as in the meantime I had got my
job back. We also had received a backpay from the army, and I had
stopped being a cleaning lady, and washerwoman, which was a
relief.
Ilan was born to everyone's delight. He developed into the
sweetest baby, with silky, blonde hair, two dimples in each cheek,
when he smiled, and slanted, brown green eyes. My father always
said: "How did you manage to have a baby with cat's eyes?
My mother and father were ever so happy with this addition to the
family, and lan became the apple of their eyes. Ilan and myself
travelled frequently to see my parents, and sometimes Ilan stayed
there on his own, when my father picked him up, after he had been to
Tel Aviv, and came to see us, It was the best thing I could have done
for my parents, after all they had been through.
In the winter of 1951-52 my father was sent by the Ministry for
Culture and Education to Europe to collect graphics for the Betsalel
He had to go to Paris, Brussels, Antwerp, Amsterdam
Museum.
and London, and he decided to take my mother along. As he was on
official mission, there was no trouble of his leaving the country,
but my mother needed an exit visa, which took a lot of fighting on my
father's part to get, and they were not allowed to take any money
with them. When my father asked the people in the relevant office, how
were they supposed to get along, the answer was: "You'll have to stay
with relations." I really don't know how they got along, I suppose had
received permission to take some money. In any case, they did stay
with friends and relations everywhere.

=== page 0040 ===
3
My mother was still suffering from the after effects of the
food shortage during the siege. Her system could not tolerate the
good European good food. My father's cousin, Arlette Tromeur with
whom they were staying in Paris, sent my mother to her doctor, who
after having examined her, asked where she had come from. He said, she
was in the same state, as the concentration camp survivors, he had
seen right after WWII. He gave her some medication, which put her
right again in a couple of weeks.
For some reason, it was also in Paris that my mother applied for
Restitution Money from the Germans, something she had refused to do
so far as she did not want to accept money from murderers, I can't
remember what prompted her. Maybe it was my parents near poverty, or
maybe it was the sight of Germans walking around looking healthy, and
well to do. I know my father told me why she decided to apply at that
moment but I have forgotten, although somewhere the information
should be stored neatly away in my brain. I just can't type the right
keys to retrieve this bit, and other bits of information.
My parents enjoyed this trip to the capitals of the western
world immensely. It really rejuvenated them, after all they had been
through, and they wrote glowing accounts home. I remember how
especially they were impressed in Brussels, where all the streets
were decorated for Christmas, and music by Haydn was relayed through
the streets on loudspeakers.
They happened to be in London, when King George the 6th died.
They were returning on foot late on the night when the King's body was
lying im state in Westminster Abbey, and the gates would be opened in
the morning for the public to file past the coffin. They saw a queue
of people around the Abbey, standing silently in the bitter cold,
waiting to to pay their last respects to their late sovereign. It
was a most impressive sight, and one they never forgot.
They sent us a small sausage from France, a sight we had not had
for a long time, I hung it up on the side of our bookshelf in our bed¬
sitting room, because it was so precious, and we had one slice each,
every day. In London my parents also met with old friends from
Berlin, who lived in New York. When they heard about the food
shortages in Israel, they regularly sent us a food package from New
York, with lots of tinned meat which the doctor had recommended for
Ilan, who was suffering from rickets. We did have enough to eat, but
the quality was poor, and each person was allowed 100 grams of meat a
month, and one egg.
After my parents return from abroad, my father found that life
for him at the Betsalel Museum was becoming more and more difficult,
because of the director's jealousy of my father's achievements,
There were constant rows, and scenes, something very difficult to
bear for my very sensitive father.
At the same time, Dr. Hecht in Haifa had somehow persuaded the
Mayor Abba Khoushi to establish a museum of modern art in Haifa, and
to make his friend, Dr. Schiff, the director, Dr. Hecht was a very
influential man in Haifa. He had built the Dagon Silo with his own
means, thereby bringing jobs and business to Haifa and its port. Such
was his prestige, and I assume the power of his money, that the Town
Hall Sessions which he attended, were conducted, in German, because
Dr. Hecht, the great Zionist, whose hero was Dr. Herz, and who later
became an advisor to Menahem Begin, could not speak Hebrew!!
Dr. Hecht admired my father, and he wanted him in Haifa, and so
it came about, that the Museum for Modern Art was created, and the
directorship offered to my father.

=== page 0041 ===
38
It was no easy decision to accept the Haifa offer, it meant
leaving Thea and Gaby, and many good friends. On the other hand, my
parents, were glad to leave Jerusalem and its sad memories behind.
They had always found Haifa an attractive Mediterranean town, with
none of the gloom of holiness of Jerusalem and its religious
population, which was really depressing. These facts combined with
the difficult situation my father had with the director of the
Betsalel Museum, decided my parents to accept the offer, and in 1954
my parents moved to Haifa, to a tiny service flat belonging to the
Haifa Municipality in New Romema. The flat in 3, Palmach street
consisted of an entrance which was also the kitchen, a bathroom, and
a bedsitting room from which you could step into a pretty garden. A
year later a flat on the 2nd floor of the same house became vacant,
and my parents bought it with a mortgage from the Municipality. In
those days, this flat cost 8,000 Israel pounds, which was a
fortune.
My father's task was to build up a museum from scratch, a
delightful prospect, which made him say;" At the age of 63 I am the
only
young man fit for this kind of job." I shall write about his
work, when writing about my father's life in particular,
My mother found a job in the Technion (Israel Institute of
Technology) Library, as a classifier. The Technion in those days was
on Haar, in a an imposing building, built by the architect Baerwald
in the early 30ies. The library offices were housed in small rooms,
up on the 3rd floor. In summer it got very hot, and my mother had to
stop work for a few months. She got the job, because the Director of
the Library was Dr.Tunya Gladstein, who my parents had first met in
Berlin, when he was a lodger with the Serebrisky family about who I
have written earlier. The Gladstein family lived in Romema, and they
met by chance, one day, while strolling in the street, one
evening
My mother's task was the classification of, books on
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and related subjects, according to
the Dewey Decimal classification System. It is a much more
than the layman would think, to get the
complicated task
classification right, especially in scientific and technological
subjects, and numerous books have been written on the subject.
Moreover every year, additions, and corrections to the system are
published, which, in the days before computerisation, had to be cut
out and glued into the existing lists of available Dewey numbers.
This kind of work suited my mother's great knowledge of the above¬
mentioned subjects, her analytical faculties, and her well known
sagacity, as well as her deft hands, for doing the updating of the
Dewey System lists. She loved her work, and had great fun with the
Departmental Boss, Yitzhak de Vries, an engineer, who preferred
classification to engineering, and generally speaking was not too
fond of work, to put it elegantly, but was otherwise quite a mild, and
friendly person,
For some reason, however Dr. Gladstein never gave her a
permanency, under the pretext of her being only a part time employee.
I am afraid, for some reasons, he always tried to introduce new
persons to the various jobs in the library, and there were a lot of
unpleasant, things going on behind the scenes, which are best
forgotten. My mother worked as a classifier until her retirement in
1967 or 68.
As soon as my parents became established, they made plenty of
friends, and generally speaking enjoyed their Haifa life much more
than their life in Jerusalem with its many complications.

=== page 0042 ===
As my mother was working, my parents had established a little
routine to save my mother cooking in the hot kitchen. In those days,
there was a wonderful restaurant in Herzl Street, the High Street of
the Hadar Ha'Carmel section of Haifa. Hadar Ha'Carmel (which means:
Glory of the Carmel) is between downtown Haia, and the Carmel Ridge.
It was there that the first houses were built in the twenties and
thirties, and that is where the Old Technion Building designed by
the architect Baerwald still is, now functioning as a Science and
Technology Museum.
The above mentioned restaurant was called Matamim, which means
"Delicacies" It was run by a German Jewish couple, with typical
German efficiency, and excellent food. The head waiter, was a thin,
gloomy looking chap, never seen to smile. He rushed efficiently about
the restaurant with the speed of a galloping cat. His name was Alex,
and he was an ex-head waiter from a plush Vienna restaurant. My
father had his main course lunch there, and either stayed in town, or
came home, and had a desert with my mother. The Matamin restaurant
still exists, after many changes in ownership, but its former glory
is all gone. It used to be a cherful, bright bustling place. It now
looks sad, commonplace, and seems rather empty. About ten years ago,
I think, I saw an old old bent man in one of the Haifa streets. He sad
face looked familiar, as well as his now slowed-down gait." Now, who
was that?" I thought." Of course!" It was poor old Alex. How sad some
memories can be.
In the meantime the Restitution money from Germany had started
coming in, which made life much more easier, and my parents could
afford to go abroad each summer, to escape the heat, and forget the
daily worries. My father was very successful in his efforts of
building up a museum from a few office rooms in one corner of the big
Haifa Town Hall. And unlike the times before the restition arrived,
he did not have to rush around the country in unreliable Egged (the
country's only bus company) buses, lugging a heavy suitcase with his
big projector and slides, in order to lecture in various Kibutzim,
and other locations where people were interested in his lectures.
He was very popular as a lecturer, and I cannot listen to any other
lecturer on art, except to Sir Kenneth Clark, because the way he
presents his lectures, and his thoughts, remind me of those of my
father's.
So the restitution money made life easier and on one occasion
my parents at last went to Greece, I say at last, because ancient
Greek civilisation and art were my father's passion. Now, in his late
60ies, he could finally afford to realise his dream, and walk up the
Acropolis admire the Amphitheatre at Epidaurus, and, as he said:
"Visit the Oracle in Delphi." It was dream come true.
One evening, in Athens my parents were strolling in a park near
their hotel, when my mother suddenly clasped my father's arms
My ankle broke!" she gasped. It was a completely spontaneous
break, due to osteoporosis. She could not take a step further, By
chance, another couple from the hotel, were strolling in the same
park. This couple were German tourists, and they had tried to be very
friendly to my parents, because they were obviously the kind of
Germans who were ashamed of what had been done to the Jews, but my
mother had still had a deep aversion to Germans, and tried to avoid
them. It was very embarassing to her that they, of all people should
come to her rescue, but that is what happened. They called a taxi, and
put my mother inside, and so she was brought to a hospital. She had
suffered a multiple fracture to her ankle, and a very friendly and
deftly handed surgeon mended it perfectly.

=== page 0043 ===
She had to stay in hospital for over a week, and as she did not
want my father to sit around, doing nothing, for such a long time,
missing out on so many things he still wanted to see, they agreed that
he should travel around on his own, visiting the places, he still had
not seen, as she was very well looked after in the hospital. Everybody
was most kind to her, and they were a few people around speaking
French, who talked to her. And when people visiting other patients in
the beds around her, found out that she was a stranger on her own,
they came to visit her as well, and brought her sweets and
flowers.
Somehow, it was managed to get her on a plane later, and to fly
home to Israel, and carry her upstairs to the flat. But then the
typical Israel difficulties started. She had to be X-rayed a month
after the accident. And the X-ray department of the Sick Fund was
located on the third floor of the building without a lift!!!!
She was brought there by ambulance, but the ambulance men, refused to
carry her upstairs."Let her hop upstairs, they told my father.
Somehow my father, with his usual determination, and very polite and
refined anger, mixed with sarcasm, got them to carry my mother
upstairs. Any way, she recovered quite well. Unfortunately, at a
later date, she fell down the entrance steps to the house - there were
only two steps - and fractured her arm. Another time, she rolled down
a long flight of steps in the Technion Administration Building,
blinded by the light from downstairs, as she later said, and broke the
other arm! For the rest of her life, I was terribly concerned, that
she should not have another fall, because of her very bad
osteoporosis, and thankfully she never fell down again.
My mother had first injured her back, when in 1933, she had to do
all the sorting, and packing in Berlin, that job proved to be too
strenuous for her delicate structure.
When she was in her fifties, while sitting down for lunch, she
felt a terrible spasm in her back, and could not straighten up again.
It turned out to be a slipped disc. The doctor wanted to put her into
a plaster of Paris corset, but she refused, because of the terrible
weight, she would have to carry. So he ordered her to lie down for two
months. She did that, going to the bathroom with the help of two
sticks. When the disc finally had relocated, she had to learn to walk
again, because her legs had been out of use for so long. The doctor
wanted her to wear a corset, but she could not bear the pressure. So
she pulled out all the stays, and being good at dressmaking,
fortified it with strong material. The doctor, who was a very nice
man, rather a friend of the family, wanted to see this contraption. On
seeing it, he just shook his head, and shrugged his shoulders. He
thought it useless. But it did help my mother.
My father had not been well either from about a year before they
went to Haifa, whenever he went uphill, he had strong chestpains, and
had to stop for a moment. It was Angina, and he was given NT tables
to be dissolved under the tongue, ECGs were made repeatedly, but
nothing found. Nowadays, he would have been sent to hospital and
further checks been made, but in those days, heart disease care was in
its infancy.
So he went on like this for quite a while, until one night,
shortly after his 70th birthday, he suffered a massive heart attack.
The day before, a sculptress had organised her exhibits in the museum
before an exhibition, and was carrying her busts etc. to and fro. My
father, ever the gentleman had helped her, although, he knew quite
well, he should not have done.

=== page 0044 ===
7
At this time I was living in Givataim, a small town, attached to
Tel Aviv in the east. I remember getting the phone call from my
mother, telling me about my father's heart attack, but asking me not
to visit for the time being. When I finally could visit him, I found
him sitting on a chair in the ward, fuming with rage: "This had to
happen to ME!!!" he exclaimed. He had been the healthiest person on
earth, until he started his angina. He never had a day's illness
throughout his life. So, naturally this came as a great shock to him.
I think my mother had been expecting something like this in her
wisdom. She probably knew, that angina could be a precursor to a heart
attack. Again she was in a difficult situation, having to cope with
everything on her own. Luckily, my parents had an extremely nice, and
friendly doctor, which was helpful, as my father had many ups and
down throughout that year. However exactly a year after the heart
attack, my parents flew to Holland to attend a Congress of Museum
Directors in the Hague, which went off very well. My father even had
had a one hour conversation with Queen Juliana! He found her a very
intelligent, but very sad lady. On my parent's return, I said to my
father; "There, you see last year you were in hospital, being mad at
your fate, and exactly a year afterwards, you are having a
conversation with a Queen! Isn't that something?
My father slowed his pace down a little bit, and was doing
relatively well, I remember, one day, when I was visiting my parents,
he suddenly felt very weak and unwell, just as he was on the point of
returning to the museum after a short afternoon nap, and my mother and
myself were somewhat alarmed, and asked him to stay at home. He got up
from his chair, and said: "For heaven's sake! Let me live the way I
want to. One day, I'll just drop dead, and that will be it!
He took many pills to keep going, but he did keep going. However
at the beginning of 1964, he started to have mysterious pains around
his right shoulder blade. The doctor could not find a thing, his heart
was in good condition, but the pains did not go away. On retrospect I
really don't understand why he was not checked up in a hospital, but
maybe things were not done that way in those days. Towards summer the
pains got worse, but my parents decided to go to Switzerland all the
same. My father's pains got worse. At that time, my parents were in
Ascona, visiting his cousin, the writer. Jose Orabuena, who was
living there. Jose had an excellent Italian doctor. My father
consulted him, and this doctor, advised him to return home, and check
into a hospital for tests. My mother thinks, the doctor suspected
something he did not wish to talk about.
On one of their last days in Switzerland, while my parents were
walking across a square in Ascona, three nuns, dressed all in black,
rushed across their path, and my father had a premonition that these
three nuns were the messengers of death. My father, certainly was not
superstitious. He was an agnostic, who said of himself, when asked
about his beliefs."I am an ancient pagan!" probably thinking of his
beloved Greek Gods who are such fun. So, his having a premonition,
caused by three nuns was strange. But when people who generally are
not superstitions, have such intuitive feelings they usually are
right. I also think that the three nuns must have had some connection
in his mind with the three Ladies, in Mozart's opera "The Magic
Flute, which was one of my father's favourites. Those three ladies,
are of course the servants of the Principle of Darkness, and Death,
the Queen of Night.
We, my late husband, Ilan and myself, had gone to Lod Airport to
meet my parents on their return from Switzerland, and I went to Haifa
with them in a taxi.

=== page 0045 ===
12
I stayed with them for a few days, until arrangements were made
for my father to go into the nearby Carmel Hospital, which at that
time was still quite small, and nothing like it is today.
A few instances of those days remain clearly etched on my mind.
My father wished to type something, and asked me to lift the
typewriter from the floor to the desk, because he was in such pain, he
could not do it. And I remember my father by the door, leaving the
Later, my mother told me, that at that
flat to go to hospital.
moment, she was wondering whether he would ever return through that
door, I returned home, and my mother phoned every evening, to tell us
how my father was. It was found out that he had cancer of the
prostate, which strangely, had never caused any pain. From there the
cancer had spread to his lower bronchi. The pains in the back were the
result of the cancer in the bronchi. Because of his heart condition,
the doctors decided to treat this cancer with female hormones, a
rather benign treatment. On Thursday, the end of October, in the
evening, ny mother reported that my father felt much better. He had
been up, and they arranged for my mother to come at 11 the next
morning. On Friday, the 23rd, around noon, I had a phone call from my
mother, to come to Haifa immediately, as my father was much worse. I
knew what that meant. Ilan was at school, and my ex-husband was in
hospital himself, with a nervous disorder, I left a note for Ilan,
with food on the table. I phoned my sister-in-law to look after Ilan,
and just as I was about to leave the house, there was a phone call,
from my father's secretary, expressing her condolences!
It is amazing, how in times of crises, one finds immense
strength to do everything right. I did not faint, or anything like
that I just went to the Central bus station, and took a bus to Haifa.
On the bus, the driver switched on the 2 o'clock news, and my father's
death was mentioned on the news, as well as time of his funeral.
In Haifa I took a taxi to Romema, and on entering the flat,
found my mother on the sofa, and one of our family's best friend, a
pediatrician, and child psychologist, Dr. Kaethe Tannhauser, sitting
at her side. My mother had gone to hospital at 11 o'clock, as arranged
the previous evening, When she arrived at my father's room and bed, it
was empty, which was shocking enough. Finally she located a nurse,
who found the doctor, who had treated my father. He told her that
around 9 o'clock that morning, my father had called him as he was not
feeling too well. The doctor started to take his blood pressure, and
as he was taking it, the pressure fell to zero!! My father was no
more. Nobody even thought of contacting my mother. He was transferred
to the morgue, and my mother was left in ignorance, only to arrive at
an empty bed. Nobody offered her any help whatsoever. She must have
taken a taxi to the morgue. After my arrival she told me not to go
there. She said;"It was not your father there at all. Don't go.
From there on, my mind does me a disservice. Had the funeral been
on Friday afternoon, or on Sunday? I truly don't remember. I know
that Ilan came with his other grandfather, and my aunt Thea came from
Natanya, where she lived, bringing me a black scarf, for a
headcover. My mother bought a grave for two people. There were lots of
people at the funeral, as my father had been a well known, and beloved
man. The cantor who chanted the prayers, was a decent man, and did so
very discreetly. Yet, I remembered how my father had once told me,
that at his funeral, he did not wish any religious chanting, "Let them
play Figare", he said, "This is the spirit in which I wish to be
remembered." Alas, this was not possible.

=== page 0046 ===
Just before the funeral, while my father was laid out, a man who
was one of the religious crowd in the cemetery, jumped at my mother
with a razor blade, and cut off a piece of lapel, from her jacket! We
did not know about this rather barbarous mourning custom, and not
unnaturally my mother was immensely shocked. If we had known, we
could have prevented it. And I have never seen it done afterwards. How
my mother withstood all these shocks, was really miraculous.
We returned home. We had supper with the whole family. A
journalist phoned, "Excuse me, please", he said, "I was supposed to
be at the funeral, to report on it, but could not make it. Could you
tell me about it?"
No, I could not, I wasn't there to to do his job!"
The sheer Chutzpah of this fellow, at a time like this!
There was another phone call. This time, from a very good friend
of my parents, Liz Moller, a librarian at the Haifa University.
She had not heard the bad news yet. She just wanted to know, whether
my parents had returned from Switzerland.
When I told here
started crying on the phone. Yet generally speaking, she was not an
emotional person, being a German, not Jewish lady.
I remember, while my mother was talking to Dr. Tannhauser, I
went into the other room, where the wardrobe was, and I put my head
between my father's clothes, and cried.
Dr. Kleeberg, a very famous doctor and biologist, another good
old friend of the family came, and I remember that he told us, that my
father's life could not have been prolonged, except in great agony,
for another short while, that the cancer had gone beyond hope for
recovery, even it had been discovered at an earlier stage.
Piles of letters flooded in, friends came, but finally I had to
return to Haifa, and my mother, miraculously, or rather, with her
great wisdom, and clarity of mind, managed to get over the worst, and
friends, were not lacking.
My father had left the rough draft of an essay, called; "The
Chryselephantine (made of gold and ivory) Statue of Athena
Parthenos, in the Parthenon, by the Sculptor Phidias".
He had
written it on sheets of typing paper, folded lengthwise, so that the
lines were very short. There were also lots of remarks written
lengthwise across the margins. There were dots where there were
names, and quotations which he could not remember at the moment of
writing, and the hand writing was very hurried, and extremely hard to
decipher. My mother decided, to edit this manuscript, which meant
deciphering it, and finding out, all the missing names, and
quotations, many of which were in Greek, which she did not know
except for the alphabet. It was a Labour of Love. It took her many
years to do it. The first thing we did, was for me to type it, as far
as decipherable, in which task my ex-husband helped me very well.
Wherever we could not read something, we left a blank. The rest of the
job was done by my mother. She enjoyed this challenging task, and it
made her overcome her grief. She got herself, all the necessary
literature, and she had the help of that archaeological friend, Dr.
Peter Kahana, who I have mentioned in the beginning.
She also had the necessary patience for the sometimes, nearly
hopeless deciphering. She managed to write out quotations, and
poetry in Greek, and finally, to get it published in a Swiss
specialised, half annual periodical, called; "Antike Kunst" (Ancient
Art) where the essay appeared in 1973, commemorating the tenth
anniversary of my father's death. It was a task of many challenges,
yet with patience and goodwill, she not only overcame it, but also set
a fitting monument to both my father and herself.

=== page 0047 ===
1
Here is her preface to the essay (in my translation) when it
appeared in the Magazine: "Antike Kunst". It starts with one of the
German poet's Friedrich Hoelderlin's (1770-1843) most beautiful
poems. Hoelderlin, was surely one of the greatest poets ever, but
unfortunately, he became mentally ill at the age of 35, quite aware
of what was happening to him. The introductory stanza is from one of
his poems, where he begs the Fates (The three antique goddesses of
Fate: mistresses of man' life; Clotho, who held the spindle,
Lachesis, who turned it, and Atropos, who cut the thread) to grant him
another season for his art. He lived till the age of 73 (like my
father) shrouded in a private strange world, in the care of a
carpenter, who revered this man of genius, and provided him with
human care and dignity.
By a strange coincidence, on the morning of my father's death, I
had woken up very early, and for consolation, although I did not yet
know that my father would die that morning, but I was concerned to the
utmost, I was reading this very poem. I wish to present my apologies,
for not being able to render this heavenly poem in a translation
befitting its beauty. One would have to be a genius for that kind of
translation.
The title of the essay:
Parthenos, the Vision of Phidias.
Oh, Mighty ones grant me one more summer
And one more autumn, for mellow song,
So that my heart, filled with sweet play,
More willingly would die for me.
It is evening. The hand slides along the shelf in search, and
the eye looks for a friend from among the old, well known names, a
friend whose reassuring consolation, before falling asleep, might
show the way for some hope for the next day. Hoelderlin perhaps?
The books opens on the page where the poet entreats The Fates for
respite. These words are a shock, a presentiment.
This respite was granted only until the beginning of autumn, and
the handwritten manuscript, finished, but only one third of it was
revised once. Therefore, I found myself faced with the task, to
decipher the manuscript, checking all names and dates, remove all
the errors that had crept in, and to undertake an occasional
abbreviation in order to give more precison to an idea. I endeavoured
though the author himself, might have
not to alter anything
attempted a change here and there. It was only occasionally that I
exchanged a word with a synonym for reasons of style, as would have
been the case, could we have continued the dialoque about many works
The collaboration of the archaeologist, Dr.P.
of past years.
P.Kahane was invaluable.
To penetrate Greek thought, was a lifelong task for Fritz
Schiff, along others, which were set by his education and his
profession. The Greek lessons were the only happy memories of
otherwise tormenting school days. A stay of over three weeks in
Greece, in the year 1957 had been the culminating point of his
existence, the fulfillment of a dream of many decades.
Since the age of 9 the Acropolis had been an obvious content
of my consciousness" he wrote in his diary" I had to wait for 57
years, to see it with my own eyes.... here, there is no quantity. Only
order and wisdom are to be found here....... He who went up here,
took life in all its aspects, very seriously.... Each visit is an
inspiration.

=== page 0048 ===
45
Throughout his last years, troubled by illness, the books of the
Greek philosophers, and those who had thought about them, were his
constant reading material.
That is how, this text came into being after, lengthy
preparations; it is an essay, without any claim of being a scientific
treatise. It is an essay written with comprehensive knowledge and
deep insight, acquired during the course of a lifetime rich with
work - a legacy, it seems to me, of a man who took life in all its
aspects very seriously.
Hilde Schiff.
This preface is the best epitaph my mother could have written
for herself. It is the lagacy of a woman who took life in all its
aspects very seriously". Unwittingly this little preface describes
herself better than anyone could ever do. A sensitive soul, open to
beauty, steeled by pain, and a very precise thinker.
Dr. Hecht,
In the year 1979 the book was published in Hebrew.
who I have mentioned before, and who owned a publishing house, called
Shikmona, an archaeological site) wanted to publish it in Hebrew,
but he did not want to be the only one to finance it. In the beginning
the Haifa Municipality who had been my father's employer, wanted to
participate with 50 of the expenses. But then Abba Chushi, the mayor
of Haifa, who had been a great admirer of my father, died, and the
municipality withdrew from this project. Dr. Hecht managed to get the
University of Haifa to finance the other half, He had a few hundred
copies printed, but never bothered to distribute them in bookshops.
He sent copies to all the Institutions who might be interested, and
put the rest into storage. In 1985, after my mother's death, on the
very day, I moved into her flat, I got a phone call from Dr. Hecht's
driver telling me that he was coming with a few 100 copies of the
book, would I be at home to receive them? I said, sorry. I haven't got
space for a few crateful books, on the spur of the moment. I would not
mind having 2 dozens of copies, but I am just moving house. Why wasn't
I told of this before? He did not know. So I managed to get hold of Dr.
Hecht's secretary, who told me that Dr. Hecht wanted the space, and
I can't
thought I would be the right person to store the copies.
remember exactly what happened afterwards, I got a few copies. That
is all I know. I was also a bit miffed at the dictatorial way Dr. Hecht
went about things. But who said that a millionnaire, with umpteen
business interests should be a nice, considerate person?
The 1979 Hebrew edition of the book was published with a revised
More material had been published on the Athena
bibliography,
Parthenon, in the years between 1963 when my father wrote it, and
1979, when it was published in Hebrew, a period of 16 years. So the
publishers asked for a revised bibliography, which was compiled by
Dr. Ehud Lev, a young archaeologist at the University of Haifa. My
mother found him a very pleasant young man, and she was very happy
that the book was finally published.
While my mother had been corresponding with the publishers if
the magazine "Antike Kunst" in Berne, to whom she had been
recommended by Dr. Kahane, her correspondent on the other side, was
Ms. Martha Ronde-Liegle, an editor. When these two ladies finally met
in person, on one of my mother's trips to Switzerland, they became
instant friends, Martha was in her early forties, a divorced lady,
with a lovely little girl, and entirely devoted to her work, and to
her little daughter. It was Martha who introduced my mother to the
"Pension Erica", in Langenbruck, near Basle where my mother spent two
months every summer, until the end of her days.

=== page 0049 ===
46
Pension Erica was (and still is) a large, pleasant 3 story Swiss
house, built in 1909 by the present owner's grandfather, who
originally was a gardener, and who kept a large vegetable garden
around the hotell, using his own vegetables for cooking. When my
mother first came to Langenbruck, it was owned by the son of the
builder, Mr. Erich Mueller, and his wife. Mr. Mueller was a first
class cook, and vegetable gardener, his wife, a hotel manageress, who
did not mind serving at table, doing odd jobs, and minding the
beautiful garden. She was hard at work, tirelessly, from morning
till night. She was a lovely, friendly woman. Their son, was, and
still is, an excellent cook, who combined solid Swiss cuitine, with
oriental flavours, as he had travelled extensively before settling
down. As my mother returned there every year, the Muellers and
herself became good friends, It was a very safe place for my mother to
be, and they were comfortable, even walks around the hotel to some
woods and to the village. In later years, I accompanied her to
Langenbruck, and went on excursions from there on my own, because I
knew, that I left, my mother was in good hands.
In the summer of 1965, my mother decided to go on a trip to
Italy, Switzerland and Germany with Ilan, who was 16 years old then.
1964 had been a traumatic year. In September, my ex-husband's mother
had died. She was 76 years old, a very, frail, nearly blind woman, she
had suffered several heart attacks, and she kept alive through sheer
will power, probably because she knew that her husband would be lost
without her. And so it was. He had been an extremely gifted man in
many ways; he was a urologist, and a surgeon. His hobbies were
These subjects
precison mechanics, photography and astronomy.
exceeded hobby status however, as quite often, he earned his living
by them. He seemed, on the face of it, a most independent and strong
personality. However, after his wife died, he felt totally lost. He
died of a heart attack, obviously caused by grief, in January 1965.
So we had 3 deaths in the family, each following the next one.
This must have been the reason why my mother took Ilan on a good
holiday, which both thoroughly enjoyed. My mother knew Italy well,
through her travels with my father, and knew what to show Ilan. In
these days, she was still comparatively young, and active, only 67
years old. For Ilan's sake, she even went to Munich, as normally she
would not have set foot into Germany. She wanted to show him the world
famous Science and Technology Museum there, which is called the
Ilan ran all over the place, for several days,
"German Museum
while my mother sat in the beautiful garden, after she had done enough
walking around. Later she told me, that this visit had reminded her
of the days, when she had been a student in 1916 and had shown her
brother Guenter, also at the age of 16 around this splendid museum
for anyone interested in Science and Technology.
Speaking of going to Germany; after this my mother went back
twice. Once to see a very old friend who had settled in Heidelberg.
She was the widow of a chemical engineer. Dr. Loewen. The Loewens had
been friends of my parents since the Berlin days. They emigrated to
Paris in 1933, from there to Barcelona, and from there to Haifa, where
Dr. Loewen worked for the Electrical Company. After his retirement,
Dr. Loewen decided to attend lectures on chemistry in the American
University in Heidelberg, where he died. His widow never moved back
to Haifa, and my mother visited her once in Heidelberg,
Also my mother's cousin, Emmy and her second husband had retired
into a Jewish retirement home in Germany, and after Emmy's second
husband died, my mother visited her there once. But she very much
disliked the German atmosphere.

=== page 0050 ===
7
In the year 1967, my ex-husband and myself separated, and later
were divorced in 1969. After our separation, I moved to Haifa staying
my mother, and thanks to the restitution money, my mother could buy me
a small flat there, going through a divorce, is always a difficult
time, and also Ilan was in the army, at the same time, but my mother
really upheld everyone's morale. Just before my divorce I had studied
to become a qualified librarian, whereas before that, I had been a
private language, tutor, but owing to the difficult family
circumstances, I decided to start a new life altogether. As I had
visited my mother quite often in the Technion Library, and enjoyed
what I saw, I decided to become a librarian. So it was thanks to my
mother that I made my choice for my 3rd profession. The first one
having been handweaving, which had proved physically too strenuous.
The second profession, was teaching languages. I enjoyed being a
librarian. At first I worked in the Haifa Municipal Public Library,
which was mildly interesting, but extremely hot work in summer, as in
those days, air conditioning was only for the very rich. After a year
of work there, I got a job in the cataloguing department of the
Central Library of the Technion (Israel Institute of Technology) a
Technical and Scientific University, comprising well over 35
faculties, spread out over a huge campus on Mount Carmel. It was the
same Technion, where my mother had started work when it was still on
Haar. While the Technion was on Hadar, it looked like a medium size
college, but the New Technion could compare to any similar
institution of the western world.
During the days, when my mother still worked there, she had
moved up to the campus as well. She told me that on the first day in
the second floor offices of the library, it was discovered, that the
architects had forgotten to plan and
build toilets for the
employees!!! So one office had to be sacrificed for this important
necessity. This was not the only technical mishap of this building,
which was quite a furnace in summer with huge plate glass windows in
the actual library, and no ventilations for the librarians working
behind the scenes, In winter it was well heated, but the pipes were of
such inferior quality, that we regularly suffered broken pipes, with
water pouring down the cellings on all the papers. Then the heat was
shut off for repairs and we froze, as the electrical net could not
support electrical heaters in every office. There was never a dull
moment, but the colleagues were pleasant and well educated, and it
was fun to work there. Nowadays this library is a posh place, with
wall to wall carpeting, and air conditioning. It is completely
computerised, while I started my career there, typing on a typewriter
older than myself!!!
After my move to Haifa, my mother insisted that I learn driving.
At first I had some awful teachers, and things went very wrong. But
luckily I found a good teacher, and with a little perseverance, and
constant support from my mother, I managed to pass the dreaded test.
How right my mother had been to keep me at it. Having a car really
meant freedom, and I could help my mother a lot, driving her around,
and doing her shopping, and other errands. After the first initial
shock of my father's death and my divorce, and after I had found my
feet again, all with the help of my mother, I considered my mother to
be a very precious legacy left to me by my father, and felt that I had
to look after her, as if she was the most exquisite object on earth,
which she was, and I hope that I have done my very best,
One year before her death, my mother once said:" Whenever you
come in, it is like a fresh breeze," which was a confirmation that I
must have been doing the right things.

=== page 0051 ===
48
I hope I did make my mother's life more enjoyable during her 20
years of widowhood, where she must have missed her beloved companion
it often. After having finished with the essay on the Athena
Parthenos, she kept busy with a huge correspondence. There was the
family to correspond with. Firstly in Israel, she corresponded with
my father's sister who lived with her husband in Geva (a kibbutz) in
the Emek Yesreel (The Valley of Yesreel) where they had a married
son, and 4 grandchildren. My aunt Alice, was an excellent
correspondent, as she was a lady of great intelligence and wit. She
died about 5 years after my father. My other aunt, Thea, had moved to
Natanya, and we usually phoned, and I also went there quite a lot to
visit her. There was cousin Emmy in France, and later in Germany to
correspond with. On my father's side, there was Cousin Arlette
Tromeur in Paris. She too, died of cancer, in 1972. I shall write more
about my father's relatives, in the next chapter of the Family
History. My mother had another cousin in Australia, Ilse who had been
a dentist, with whom my mother corresponded until Ilse's death in
1975. There were many friends abroad too, there was her expupil
Erika Carius who I mentioned at the beginning. There were good
friends in Switzerland, like Nelly Aeschlimann, a lady of my age, a
piano teacher in the Berne Conservatoire who my mother met in
Langenbruck, and with who I am still corresponding. There was the
Reverend Dr. Walter Nigg and his wife who lived in Danikon near
Zurich, and who were the best friends of my father's cousin Jose the
writer, who lived in Ascona, and who liked to correspond with my
mother, because he like many others admired her, unusual
intelligence, His letters were nearly undecipherable, but as soon as
my mother had read them, she copied them, for further reading, and for
My mother had many
myself.
friends in Haifa, and a lot of visiting was done, where I would drive
my mother to her friends and vice versa. Strangely enough, towards
the end of her life, my mother was the only mobile person, among the
whole lot, and it was she who had to do the visiting.
I would like to recall here one funny incident, which happened
in Klosters where we had gone for the summer, before Langenbruck was
discovered, and where cousin Jose was at the same time for his summer
holiday. My mother and myself were crossing a large square behind the
railway station. We saw a man entering a parked car, and seeing us in
his rear-view mirror, he immediately got out again, and waited for
us. As we passed him, he bowed a little, and turning towards my
mother, he said in German with a little American accent: "Excuse me
please, are you Greta Garbo?" It was so funny, we started to giggle.
My mother, till the end of her life, could giggle like a teenager, and
she had a pretty mouth, and teeth too. Then recovering, my mother
said: "No, I am not." The man explained, that he knew that Greta
Garbo had a house in Klosters, but he did not know where, and wanted
to see her. He was living in Miami, but had met Greta Garbo at a party
in New York, where she had told him to drop in, in case he ever came to
Klosters. We thought this was very strange. If he really had met
Greta Garbo, he should know that she was a tall blonde, while my
mother was a petite and dark haired. It is true, they were both
beautiful women, but no one could hardly mix them up. The unknown man
started a whole conversation, telling us, that he was thinking of
retiring to Switzerland, that he had a brother in Tel Aviv, but did
not like it there, etc. etc. After a while, he looked at his
watch"Oh, dear," he said. "I must dash. My wife will give me a piece
of her mind, if I'm not back on time." And off he went in his car,
All this happened in broad daylight, with people passing by, so he

=== page 0052 ===
could hardly have had any sinister motives, We never could make heads
or tails of it. But a few days later I did see Greta Garbo in a shop.
and in no way did she look like my mother. In fact she had not aged as
well, as my mother.
Before, I come to the end of my mother's life story, I would like
to tell an episode about her Aunt Anna, her father's sister. My mother
had a great admiration for this Aunt, and her eyes lit up whenever she
spoke of her. In fact Aunt Anna, must have been very much like my
mother, very beautiful, and very intelligent. The following story
was only recently written to me in a letter, by her grand daughter,
Dodo Schlosser, who lives in Paris, and is my mother's cousin Emmy's
daughter. I shall translate her account from the French, as she
writes extremely well. The remarks in brackets are mine, in order to
explain to future readers a few things, which are obvious to us, but
may not be known to them.
"My grandmother Anna Wolfsohn was born in Wollstein (Province
of Posen, East Germany) on the 7th of January 1865, and died on the
She was a gifted musician who played the
12th of October 1950.
piano, and sang in choirs. On one occasion she sang in the choir
Wilhelm
conducted by
performing Beethoven's 9th symphony,
Furtwaengler. (a German conductor, 1886-1954 famous, for his
interpretations of Beethoven and Brahms)
Anna was very intelligent, and eager to acquire more knowledge.
She was a most sensible woman, of strong character. It was this
strength of character which proved to be most useful to her when she
A few days after her husband's death (she had been
was deported.
married to a Mr. Sklarek) on the 12th of October 1940, which was a
coincidence of dates of her own death, she was deported together with
other Jews of Mannheim (where she lived) in the direction of France.
For 48 hours the train she was in, was in the station of Lyon¬
Perrache, but we did not know this at the time. (Here I interrupt the
translation, in order to explain that Dodo and her mother, had
managed to escape, after the fall of Paris, with the help of Dodo's
German (not Jewish) father to the town of Lyon, where Emmy worked as a
nurse, so they were living in Lyon, but obviously could not know about
this train with the Jewish deportees)
Dodo's story" After stopping, the train went on to Gors near Pau
(Lower Pyrenees, South West France) where there was a camp held by the
French. This news spread like wildfire in the German circles of Lyon.
My father used his good relations, and established a certificate of
lodging, and acceptance of being in charge, for my grandmother.
My mother went to Gors to meet with the camp commander, who made
she
no difficulty of liberating my grandmother in June 1941.
survived the rigours of the camp and the winter (she was 76 years old)
in the infirmary, suffering from asthma and a serious bronchitis, a
disease which had become chronic, and from which she suffered every
winter. In this way, she came to live with my mother and myself, as my
father was no longer with us (Dodo's parents were divorced) she
continued living with us, and with Fred (Emmy's second husband) with
for once, seemed
Destiny
whom she had a good understanding.
understanding, I find that between my grandmother and your mother
their was a family likeness in their facial features, the way they
carried their heads, and their deliberate and determinate character
So far Dodo's story of her beloved grandmother who
of both of them."
had meant so much to my mother, who had seen quite a lot of her, when
she was still living with her parents.

=== page 0053 ===
When my mother was in her late seventies, I accompanied her to
the X-ray department of the Elisha hospital, as Dr. Munwes, her
doctor, had asked for an X-ray of her spine, Before doing the X-ray,
the hospital did a routine ECG on all patients over 70. We sat in the
waiting room, waiting for the results, when an excited nurse shot out
of the lab, and said to my mother; "You have had a heart attack
lately!" My mother looked utterly surprised, and so probably did I.
She absolutely could not remember having a heart attack. So the X-ray
was done, and her doctor was informed. To her great dismay, he put
her for 3 weeks rest into hospital. My mother was furious, and
thought that Dr. Munwes was overcautious, which he maybe was, but he
probably thought, better safe than sorry. After much searching in
her mind, my mother thought she might have suffered a mild attack,
shortly after the Yom Kippur War had broken out, in October 1973. On
that day, all the Arab States attacked Israel from on all sides, in a
surprise attack, which obviously through negligence of the Israel
Secret Service, came like a bolt from heaven. The day was very
cunningly chosen, it being the Day of Atonement, the most solemn day
in the Jewish Year, when the country is virtually at a standstill.
This is the day when not only the religious Jews, but others as well,
crowd the synagogues, fasting for 24 hours, chanting prayers, asking
God for forgivenness for their sins. However, when the the attack
started, an immediate call up of all the forces was issued, and even
very religious Jews, left the synagogues, and rushed to the three
fronts. I remember being at home, arranging some books when I heard
the unusual noise of planes overhead. At first I did not take any
notice, until I remembered it was Yom Kippur, when the whole country
was usually silent. Ilan was staying with my mother, and he drove up
to see me, and decided to drive to Tel Aviv with his car, and rejoin
his unit.
My mother said that sometime after this very dreadful day
there were hundreds of casualties - a she had felt very weak one day,
and not well altogether, but after a day's rest she felt better, and
in retrospect we thought that this must have been the heart attack
shown on the EG.
After Ilan had left, we got a postcard from him, from the Sinai.
He was alright. As all the postmen had been mobilised, there was no
proper mail service, but High School Children had volunteered to
bring soldiers mail to the families a week after the attack, Israel
gained the upper hand, but at what a price of human life, once more.
It was no wonder, my mother had a small heart attack, after what she
had been through all her life, of knowing her own beloved grandson,
the apple of her eye, at the front! Luckily it was only a small
attack. From then on, the doctor gave her small doses of a medicine
called Trasicor, to prevent further attacks.
I have mentioned that Ilan was in Haia. After having finished
his compulsory military service in 1970, he came to stay in Haifa to
take a 2-year study course in practical engineering, at a college,
attached to the Technion. My mother provided the funds for him to have
a rented room, not far away from us. Having finished his studies, he
first worked for a Car Manufacturing Plant, and later for a Marine
Engineer, where a colleague urged him to take a degree in Mechanical
Engineering. As the Technion, refused to recognise his two year study
course, the colleague, suggested that Ilan apply to the Tri-State
College, Angola, Indiana, U.S.A. where he himself and his father
before him had studied for their first degree in mechanical
engineering. Ilan applied and was accepted there, and his previous
studies recognised.

=== page 0054 ===
5
He passed his B.Sc. with distinctions, and went on to study for his
M.Sc. in The University of California, Los Angeles.
Although, as I have mentioned before, Ilan was the apple of my
mother's eye, she thought, it would be a good idea for him to go
abroad to study, in order to become more independent, although it
meant not seeing him every day, but perhaps only once a year. She
obviously thought the sacrifice was worth it. Little did she think,
he would stay there forever.
However, that me be, she took it all in her stride. One year
after lan had gone to America, we all met in Switzerland, in a place
called Chur. It was a lovely reunion, and my mother rented a car,
which la drove, and we went to many beautiful places together. By
chance Emmy, Fred, Dodo and her husband Roger also came to Chur for a
few days, so it was quite a family reunion.
Before Ilan was married, he brought Marcie over. We were
delighted, and my mother prophesied that Marcie would even be more
beautiful once she was over 40 And right she was. I flew over to
the wedding, and was stunned by everything I saw, wrote long accounts
home, and came back with stories of wonder. Later, Ilan came over with
Marce and Brian, then I years old, to the great delight of my
mother. She was 83 years old by then, and still alive when Randy was
born in 1982. But she never met Randy.
My mother had had two cataract operations while she was in her
late seventies. In those days cataract operations were not as easy to
undergo as they are today (I speak from experience, as I have had two,
and all I can say, it is easier than having a tooth extracted) In
those days, she could not have an implant, because, the surgeon said,
She had to stay a
the shape of her eye inside was too elongated.
week in hospital, and on coming home, she had to go around with a
bandage for 4 weeks, was not allowed to bend over, or to read, she had
to have help every day, and of course that was irritating too. The
worst bit was, that she could not have glasses made to fit. They
caused nause. The only answer were contact lenses. The local contact
lenses were not very good. One once shattered in her eye, while the
optician was fitting it, Luckily, he very deftly recovered all the
bits.
So, each year, when my mother went to Switzerland, she went to a
specialised optician who fitted her with good Swiss lenses. They had
to be taken out every month to be cleaned. So she neede two pairs. And
as they became opaque in use, she needed two pairs each year. She
learned how to take them out, and put them back in again, which was
amazing at her age. She had to do this frequently, because of the
dusty Israel climate, which caused eye infections. So sometims for
several days, she had these eye infections, and had to go without
(luckily) usually, one lens. One really must admire the degree of
fortitude with which she suffered all these discomforts. She never
complained, and was always cheerful. Was there ever such a
woman
In the summer of 1984, we were in Langenbruck as usual. My mother
had given me the means to take an organised tour to Provence, with a
company called "Academic Studies" which meant that we only visited
places of art and history. No silly shopping, or so called
entertainment. Our guide was an art historian from Austria, a most
ineteresting woman, who had obtained her Ph.D. in Art History at the
age of 50. Before that she had had a degree in Chemistry. She was a
live wire, and really entertaining. I returned to Langenbruck happy,
and full of stories to tell my mother.

=== page 0055 ===
I found my mother in excellent shape, fit and well looking.
Before my departure to provence, she had had a spell of a cold, and I
had bought her a pretty Thermos flask in a shop, which carried
everything, but well and truly everything, distributed over 2 floors
of a small cottage, and owned by an elderly lady, and her sleep big
collie dog. Her goods were not cheap, as hers was the only shop in the
village, but I wanted this flask for my mother, so she could have a
warm drink in the middle of the night, as one gets very thirsty at
night with a cold.
I still have the flask, which I cherish together with other
objects which had belonged to my mother. My mother had long recovered
from the cold, and on the 5th of October, a day or two before our
return to Israel we went for a walk towards an ancient monastery,
turned into a farmhouse. It was a pretty walk of about, one hour
through lovely gardens, and then through a wood. Of the ancient
monastery, a few weather beaten figures of saints, surrounding a
gothic entrance could still be made out. We sat down on a bench, neara
trough running over with water, bubbling endlessly through an open
spout. A pretty tabby kitten came to see us. It jumped on the bench,
and up our necks, and laps, and was quite funny. When we got up to go
home, it followed us for quite a while. My mother easily walked all
the way back to the hotel without stopping
We flew home on the 8th of October, a few days later, I visited
my mother, probably with the washing, as usual, and maybe with some
food I had cooked. I always cooked meat, usually turkey for both of
us, and also baked cakes, and biscuits, and always took her washing
in. As I was about to depart, and we were standing in the hall, my
mother outlined her plans, of what she was going to do in the next few
weeks. For the life of me, I cannot remember what it was. I only
remember she seemed to be very enterprising, and was looking 10 years
younger, than her 86 years. She also showed my a tiny egg whisk which
she had bought in that interesting shop in Langenbruck.
On Friday, I had supper with her, and she she told me that
during the night between Thursday and Friday, she had had awful pains
in her back. The pains were so bad, that she finally got up, and
walked to and fro in the living room for 20 minutes, until they wore
off, and she returned to bed, and now she was alright once more.
asked her why, on earth she did not phone me. "Oh, no; I would not do
"No, thank
that", she replied, typically, I insisted; Why not?
you I managed quite well. No need to disturb you.
I phoned her on Saturday evening, and she had just been on a walk
with Mrs. Berner, a very good friend of hers, who lived a few houses
away, I had some things to do on Sunday morning, and we arranged, that
I should come and see her on Sunday around 11 am. I had been pensioned
in July, and was no longer working, and starting to reorganise, my
workless life.
When I entered the flat on Sunday at llam, I found my mother on
her bed, with Dr. Rieck, who now for years, had replaced Dr. Munwes,
"Your mother had a heart attack, he told me, "I
sitting beside her.
have called an ambulance!" About an hour earlier, my mother had had
those bad back pains again, and felt so weak, she had to lie down.
Luckily, her cleaning lady had been there. My mother managed to phone
Dr. Rieck, who rushed to her bedside, recognising the symptoms.
During the past years, my mother had gone over to Dr. Rieck, who
lived just up the road, whilst Dr. Munwes lived in the middle of the
Haar, near the old Technion, and to see him, meant taking a bus, and
a trip to town. Dr. Munwes was a very good doctor, and a very nice
man, but Dr. Reck was fabulous.

=== page 0056 ===
53
He could talk anybody out of his or her ailment. He rarely
prescribed medicines, except for serious conditions.
It is from him that I learned that "The body heals itself" if
you wait patiently for 2 weeks or so, unless it is something very
serious. I remember my mother telling me, that her father had told
her, that you can recognise a serious disease by either continuous
bad pain, or a high temperature, "For other harmless ailments" my
grandfather advised, "Just take it easy, and lie down to rest," which
was basically the same advice, but Dr. Rieck was here, alive, and you
could go there, and talk to him, which alone was as good as medicine.
Dr. Rieck himself, died a few years after my mother, of cancer of the
liver. He refused to go into hospital, and be treated, and asked to be
left to die in peace at home. He was a wonderful man, and very much
mourned by his probably hundreds of patients.
To return to my story, the ambulance arrived, my mother was
carried in, looking pale and worried. I followed in my car. She was
put into intensive care, and once again, I cannot remember, what
happened next. The next day, she seemed better, but was much annoyed
by what the nurses had done to her hands. They had taken blood
samples, and her hands were all black and blue, because they could not
find any veins. The next few days she seemed better, but looking very
lost, and perhaps annoyed with what had happened. Then she was moved
into another intensive care room, which was unfortunately full of
people, who received hordes of noisy visitors, I complained to the
nurses at the desk, but they just shrugged their shoulders, and gave
the typical Israel answer: "What can you do?" to which I replied;"Get
the visitors out. There are some kids there, drinking soft drinks,
and reading the paper what are they doing in intensive care?" The
nurses just shrugged their shoulders. It was afternoon, and Mrs.
Tannhauser came to see my mother, and some other lady, I cannot
remember who I left, after my mother had had her supper, and said, I
would return early next morning.
My flat was 5 minutes walk away from the hospital, so I did not
bother with the car, I was half way up towards the hospital, when a
torrential rain started. It was really like the flood. The road, a
steep incline towards the hospital, turned into a raging current, and
the huge hospital, built like an inverted pyramid, seemed to float
somewhere above the waters like Noah's Ark. I had to take shelter, in
a nearby entrance, which was just a tiny roof, really. After a while,
the rain turned into a shower, the sun came out, and I ventured out.
Rather dripping wet, I came into the room where I had left my mother
the previous evening. She was not there I found a nurse, who told
me, that during the night, my mother had suffered a brain
haemorrage, and had been put into a separate room, which she pointed
out to me. The room was huge. It looked as if it could accomodate 6
beds. But there was only my mother's bed in it. Her hands were
restlessly moving on top of the blanket, but they were tied to the
raised railings at the side. She did not recognisse me. I went in
search of a doctor. Finally I located her. She was a very nice Russian
lady. She told me about the haemorrage, and that my mother had to be
tied down, as she was trying to get out of bed, all the time. "Your
mother is a lovely lady, the doctor told me, "I had a long talk with
her yesterday, before this happenend. I never met such a charming
woman," But this nice doctor could not tell me what would happen
next.
I returned to the room, and went up to my mother. This time she
recognised me, "How did you come in?" she asked. There is no door to
this room, I saw you crawling in under the curtains.

=== page 0057 ===
"But there is a door"? I said, very large door, Look, over
there" But my mother looked at me blankly with a little smile. A
nurse came in with breakfast. We tried to feed her, but she refused
to eat, and she was on a drip anyway, so I wasn't too worried about
that. However from her confused talking, I understood that she
thought, that she was still in Langenbruck, and wanted to go home. I
tried to explain to her that she was in hospital, that she wasn't
well, and could not go home, no yet, later. But she did not
understand what I said. She just repeated that she wanted to go home.
I was so upset, I sat down, in a far corner, where she could not see
me, and cried my heart out. After a while, I got up, and returned to
her bed, but she did not recognise me. I sat down again. She did not
look for me. She did not say anything, only her hands moved on the
blanket, and the monitor beeped quite regularly. I went home, and
returned later. She did not know who I was, I just sat there thinking
how my mother's wonderful brain had come to this. She also looked
rather strange, and I remembered what she had told me, after my
"It was not your
father's death, when she had seen him in the morgue;
father at all.
Later, the nice
doctor returned, and told me to go home and have a rest. She would
phone me, if anything happened. I went home, and phoned Dr. Rieck,
asking for advice, but he could not tell me, whether my mother would
regain her faculties. Presumably, worn out by fatigue, and worry, I
fell asleep. The doctor phoned me at 2 o'clock in the morning My
mother had suffered another serious brain hemorrage, and all was
over. Although I had lost my precious mother, I was grateful for her
release. She had reached her 86th year. She had had an eventful, and
rich, long life, Her last years, although without my father, had been
comparatively happy, and she was entitled to a good rest. I only
wished I knew she had not really suffered at the end. That maybe she
had slipped into oblivion with a nice dream, as people do on their way
to the beyond.
On the notice I put into the Jerusalem Post, I said:
"We say, farewell to Dr. Hilde Schiff.
I know one thing; One can get as old as the hills, but it is nearly
impossible to live without a mother, and a father, especially without
a mother. They both remain my constant companions in my thoughts, and
I like to think that they are up there up, among the stars, watching
how their daughter is doing. They still are there. Somewhere.

=== page 0059 ===
DR. GUENTHER WOLFSCHN.
My mother's brother, Guenther was born in 1900. I am sorry, I do
not know the exact date, and unfortunately there is no one I can ask.
I am afraid, I really do not know much about him, I shall endeavour to
put down, as much as I know, I have already mentioned him, here and
there in the account of the lives of his parents, and my mother.
He was of medium build, very slim and slightly built, with an
aristocratic, elongated face, and the dainty Wolfsohn noose. He
looked very much like his grandfather Dr. Max Meyer Wolfsohn. He
walked with quick small steps. As a child of course, he had a childish
face, and my mother always said that Yaron reminded her of Guenther as
a child,
He was a child prodigy, who could play the piano at the age of
three, and had an absolute pitch, I have in my possession, one of his
compositions, to which my mother had written the words. It is a very
pretty tune. There is no date on it.
The words are as follows: "The beautiful green wood, that is my
I like walking there, when the birds are warbling. When
above.
everything is green and flowering, I am happy in my mind. Oh you
beautiful, green wood, remain my dwelling place forever.
It sounds much better in the German original, where it rhymes as
well. And green woods were what my mother liked best till the end of
her life, and I presume so did her brother.
In the chapter about the family I have told how brother and
sister always did everything together, their plays and games were
always of a technical and scientific nature, or playing the piano
forhanded. There was one thing Guenther could or did not do, and
that was drawing, at which my mother excelled. Together the children
a three floor high Meccano dollhouse, including electric
built
light, and a lift, powered by batteries.
shall repeat here two stories, which I have put down
previously, but which belong to this chapter too. When Guenther and
Hilde were children, they lived in a two floor apartment. The two
floors were connected by a metal spiral staircase, which made
dreadful noises when ever someone went up or down. I know this,
because, when I was a small child, my grandparents still lived in the
same apartment. The children were busy constructing something
upstairs. Guenther went downstairs with a pot of glue, but he dropped
it, and it made a terrific noise falling down, bumping and clattering
all the way. My grandfather rushed out of his study;"Guenther?" he
shouted, "Is that you?" "No, father came the reply, "Only the pot of
glue! Everybody had a good laugh of relief.
Here is another story once more; Elberfeld, where the family
lived, was situated in a valley, surrounded by wooded hills, those
lovely green woods, so much beloved by the family, who took endless
Sunday walks there. In winter, with the snow piled high, the children
went up the woody hills, a long way up, dragging their sleighs to the
very top, and then slid down in a delicious drive, downhill, all the
way to town, When they came out of the woods into the streets, they
decided to take a short cut, through a lane, closed to traffic. At the
bottom of the lane, a policeman was waiting for them. "Don't you
children know, that traffic is forbidden in this lane?" he asked
sternly. Yes, they knew. "I'll have to take down your names and
address then, said the policeman, and took out his notebook and
pencil, When the children told him their names, the policeman stopped
writing: "Are you the children of Dr. Alfred Wolfsohn?" he asked.

=== page 0060 ===
56
"Yes,"they said, "we are.
"How sad"
said the policeman
closed the notebook, and put the pencil away, "How sad! Off you go
now, and don't let me catch you again.
Which showed how popular,
and well known my grandfather was, It was hard for the policeman to
believe that the children of such a famous doctor, and well known
upright citizen, as Dr. Wolfsohn, could contravene the law.
Guenther was not only a child prodigy in music, he distinguished
himself at school too. He finished High School at the age of sixteen,
instead of the usual age of 18. I have mentioned in the chapter about
my mother, how he visited my mother in Munich, where she was studying,
and they both walked around for days in the fabulous German Museum
which is a huge museum for Science and Technology.
Guenther must have studied in Munich as well. My mother told me,
how she, Guenther, and my father, once decided to go on a week-end
walking tour of the Bavarian alps. Among the food they took, was rice.
In the Alps they have huts, where people can rest at night, and cook
their food. On the first evening they boiled some rice. None of them
had any idea that rice swells up enormously, so they put quite a lot
of rice into their cooking pot, and got a huge quantity of rice, which
lasted them for days. That is how they learned to boil rice.
Another story from their student days was as follows: when
Guenther was young, he apparently had quite a short temper, and
easily got into a rage. Once, when all three were having a chat, my
father teased Guenther about something, at which he became so mad, he
picked up a slipper, and hurled it in the direction of my father,
which made them all laugh.
think that Guenther and his future wife The met at
university, where The was also studying mathematics, and related
sciences. She later became a teacher in those subjects.
Having obtained his degree, Guenther worked, I think, in the Ma¬
Planck Institute for Physics in Berlin, I hope I am right with the
name, but I am sure he worked in a big Institute for Physics. I met
Thea for the first time in my life consciously, probably after they
had married, and lived in a flat. It was Chanuka time, which was a bit
ahead of Christmas. The was the daughter of a Reform Rabbi. She came
from a home where the dietary laws of Kashruth, and the Lwas
concerning rest on Shabat were strictly observed. However, she had
broken away from them, as she told me one day. When she was a young
student, living on her own in Berlin in rented accomodation, she once
got very hungry on a Saturday, but to get to the nearest Kosher
restaurant, she would have to take a tram. She debated this with
herself, and went by tram. That was the beginning of breaking with
the traditions with which she had grown up as a child, and also of her
independence as a mature person. After that, she did not worry too
much about Shabat, and Kashruth, but she still liked to light Hanuka
candles, and do a Kiddush on Friday evening.
The was at Chanukah
So, the first time. I remember meeting
time, and she had lit a Chanuka candelabra (Chanukia) I had never seen
that before, and it was explained to me that this was instead of a
Christmas tree, but I don't think I understood what it was all about.
I must have been very small, as Thea knew me from the day I was born,
but I only remember her from that time on. She once told me that as a
new baby, I had the face of a small mouse with two big eyes. I really
got to know and appreciate The only in Jerusalem, and she became one
of my best friends,
In 1933 Guenther got an appointment at the University of
Utrecht, where they remained until 1936, when he got the appointment
as a lecturer in physics at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

=== page 0061 ===
57
I am sorry, I cannot give exact dates, but that was really
contemporary history, and still being a child then, I did not pay too
much attention to details of adult lives, Much later. I never
discussed these things with my mother, in order not to open old
wounds.
I have mentioned that when we came to Jerusalem from Paris, it was
decided that both the Wolfsohn and Schiff families would live
together, and the flat in Gaza Street was found. Before that, The
and Guenther lived in a flat in Abyssian Street, so called, because of
the Abyssinian Church there, and Abyssinians living in the area.
In the chapter about my mother I have already written about our
life together in Jerusalem, how we always sat around the radio on
Friday evenings to listen to Friday night concerts, and how Guenther
and my father discussed the music. Guenther's (small) grand piano
had been sent to him by his parents from Germany. It stood in the bed¬
sitting room, as well as the two sofa beds in a corner, and Guenther's
desk. Guenther still played the piano, although he did not have much
time for it with his work load. From time to time, a lady who was an
amateur violinist, came to play duets with him, and we all enjoyed
that very much.
A short while after we had arrived in Jerusalem, we acquired a
kitten. Everybody was quite happy at the thought, but Guenther was
quite against it. This grey, long-haired male kitten passed its first
night in a corner of my room on some newspapers, meowing piteously,
probably looking for its mother, brothers and sisters: "Meeoo,
momeeoo." So we called him "Miu". The next day, at some time, Miu
had dispappeared; He was finally discovered sitting on Guenther's
lap, while he was working at his desk! It was the one place we did not
even think of looking for that tiny ball of fur. From then on Guenther
became reconciled to Miu, who unfortunately however, died very young
from cat's flu. After that we had no cat. The garden was full of
visiting strays, and that was good enough. Guenther worked a lot in
the garden, which was just a bare plot. It was a garden facing the
street, and raised about 4 meters above it. Our entrance was through
the garden. The entrance was reached by steps, which formed a street
up to the Kiryath Shmuel neighboorhood, which I have mentioned in the
last chapter. The only grocery in the neighbourhood for several years
was at the top of the steps, owned by a rather miserable looking
individual, who The called; The Pesterer, because he tried to sell
you everything in his shop you did not want, and even came to the door
to remind you of his existence.
Thea and Guenther transformed the bare plot in front of the
flat, into a real garden, with a rosmarin hedge running along the
fence, lots of daisy bushes, and other plants, A Bougainvillia was
growing up around the window of the living room, and Guenther planted
a eucalyptus tree in the middle of the garden to provide shade. They
from the garden of
brought the sapling from Natanyah, presumably
Thea's brother Ludwig, Later it grew to enormous proportions. Many
years later, when Thea moved to Nathanya, the flat and garden, became
a nursery school, and when the road was enlarged, half of the garden
was sliced off. The last time I was in Jerusalem, which is now ages
ago, I passed by the house. The eucalyptus tree was still there,
standing at the edge of the garden wall, instead of in the middle. It
looked quite forlorn.
I have mentioned the happy arrival of Gaby in 1942, on page 32 in
the chapter on my mother. So I will not go over it again. One incident
still stands out clearly in my mind. Guenther had been working at his
desk, pouring over books on physics, with lots of formulas.

=== page 0062 ===
This time little Gaby, perhaps two years old, was sitting on his lap.
She pointed to the formulas, "What are they?" she asked, "They are
small animals."her father replied. And she was happy with that.
I remember another story Guenther told us; He was going up on the
bus to the University at the beginning of a new semester, a very
chatty student satt next to him, telling him all about himself, and
not letting Guenther say a word, which was alright with him. Guenther
was not only young, he looked at least 10 years younger than his age.
So obviously the student thought, he was talking to one of his fellow
pupils. "I shall be in the class of Dr. Wolfsohn said this young
innocent, "I heard he is very very strict, and has no patience
whatsoever", and went on talking about something else. Half an hour
later, Dr. Guenther Wolfsohn was standing in the lecture room, facing
a class of new students. The chatterbox from the bus was sitting right
in the first row, and Guenther literally saw his face fall!
Guenther did have a great sense of humor, and I remember quite a
lot of laughter in the house, in spite of bad times and worries. I
remember, one lunchtime, when a big sauceboat was handed around. It
must have been a family piece, maybe of Thea's. At its base two bits
had been chipped off very symmetrically right and left. Oh, said
Guenther, "Somebody must have been very hungry.
He was laso enormously clever with his hands, and constructed
all sorts of clever devices, obviously on a lathe he had in his lab in
the University. I can't remmber what they were. But they had to do
with my fathe's photography, developing, and with his big projector.
Guenther also constructed a wooden loft, in the corridor of the
house. Its supports were lying on top of the doorframes below. It was
a huge job, very exactly done.
Unfortunately during his last years, Guenther was plagued by
moebic dysentery, about nothing much could be done in those days,
and quite often, he was very poorly, and miserable, and could not go
to work.
On page 34 of my mother's biography, I have already written
about Guenther's tragic end, and its sad consequences for the family.
He died young, but he has never been forgotten. His second name
of Gideon, has been given to Ilan as his second name as well in
remembrance for another generation.
It took The many years to rehabilitate herself, which she did
with admirable will power and energy. She studied, and became a child
psychologist. Her job was to examine children in nursery schools to
find out, if they were ready or not for school. She worked at this
job, I think, well into her seventies. At the age of 60 she married
Dr. Moshe Osterweil, a widower himself. Thea moved to Natanyah where
Moshe had his dental practice. For ten years they were very happy
together, and then Moshe died of cancer. The continued living on her
own, in Natanyah where her brother Ludwig lived with his wife Kaethe
too, I used to visit her quite frequently, and always felt very happy
there. After my mother's death, The was the last relative left over
from my childhood, and we had many memories in common. In her
eighties, life on her own became difficult, and she moved in with Gaby
and Chen, where she lived until her death at the age of 90.
She had been a remarkable woman, meeting life's hardships
with remarkable wisdom, courage, and kindness of heart to her fellow
men and so she will be remembered.
