lit by a huge stained glass in lovely Art-Deco style (Art-Deco was an
elegant style much in use at the turn of the century)
This style was a revolt against the heavy pseudo Gothic, pseudo¬
Renaissance style which had been so prevalent during the last half
of the 19th century. I do not remember the subject of the window, as
my grandparents moved out when I was about 5 years old. But at the top
in a sort of decorative band there was a little boy fleeing from a
bee, and above this scene, a ribbon with the words: "You nasty beast!
Don't sting me.
My grandfather was a great admirer of Bismarck (1815-1898) who
had founded the German Reich (Empire) of which he became chancellor.
Bismarck was a very strong character, apparently did a lot of good for
Germany on the social, financial and political plan, but was
dismissed by the German Emperor at the age of 75. As I do not know
anything about German history of that time, it is difficult for me to
say whether he was worthy of admiration or not.
Another person my grandfather admired was the composer Richard
Wagner (1813-1883) He admired him as a composer. He probably did not
know anything about Wagner the man, who was a vile scoundrel. Always
being short of money, he borrowed from his friends. When they, not
unnaturally asked him to repay the loan, he insulted them instead. He
seduced the wife of one of his greatest friends and admirers (the
conductor Hans von Buelow) and finally married her.
He got the
text for his opera "Tannhauser" from the Jewish poet Heinrich Heine
(1797-1856) and then proceeded to write antisemitic articles about
him. In fact he was fiendishly antisemitic, and an inspiration to the
antisemitism of the 3rd Reich, I can only hope that my grandfather did
not know about all this, and only admired the music, which was
strangely enough admired by a great many Jewish people, including my
parents, I cannot listen to it at all.
My grandfather also believed together, with many of his
contemporaries, that the best solution for the Jewish problem would
be assimilation, How wrong he was, poor man. It just shows that very
intelligent people can be much influenced by the current thought in
My grandfather
their time.
it seems, played the violin very beautifully, but by the time I was
around he had stopped playing. Another hobby of his was carving. I
remember a beautiful chest he had carved with figures and flowers,
and a corner chair, with 2 backs, with similar carvings. He was also
a keen photographer, photographing in what was then known as
"stereo" The photographs, were developed on glass plates, the same
photograph being printed twice. It was then viewed through a viewer
which looked like a pair of binoculars, and the resulting picture had
a lovely depth.
He had his own darkroom, and he taught his children all kinds of
scientific experiments. He also hunted, and I remember one poor
hare, which he had shot hanging at the back door of the kitchen.
Here is another characteristic story about my grandfather: My
grandfather being enchanted by all new inventions, was thrilled by
airoplanes, which in those days were in their infancy, small 2 seater
double deckers etc. whenever there was an opportunity he went by
plane, as he had been the Chairman (or some such title) of the Medical
Association of Rhineland-Westfalia, he had to travel locally quite a
few times, and when he could, he took a plane. One day in the middle of
the flight, the pilot ran out of petrol. He landed in the clearing of
a wood, and wandered to the nearest petrol station, while my
grandfather quite peacefully wandered about the wood studying the
flora and fauna. Such little things never upset him.