My grandmother Elise, nee Blumenhain (translated means: Flower
meadow) born 17.9.1874, was a most beautiful woman, Her eyes were the
colour of forget-me-nots, and her hair fair blonde. When her first
child, my mother was born, she was ever so embarrassed that the child
had dark eyes and black curly hair, which were like the eyes and hair
of my grandfather. Still, she loved her little daughter ever so much,
and truly my mother was the cutest baby you could imagine.
My grandmother's father was a gentile, but her mother was
Jewish. Apparently both families had disapproved of their children
marrying a person of a different religion, and especially my
grandmother's mother was badly treated by her very narrow-minded
family. The poor young woman died of cancer of the stomach at the age
of 36, after prolonged suffering. In those days there was hardly
anything that could be done to alleviate the cancer sufferer, and for
a child to watch this prolonged agony of her mother, and see her die
must have been a traumatic event.
After his wife's death, Lise's father remarried and went off to
America with his son, but leaving his daughter behind in the care of
her mother's rather nasty family, who were especially nasty to her,
because of her non-Jewish father. My mother told me that they made her
mother's life a misery, but she did not tell me how. I remember
visiting one of my grandmother's aunts when I was a very small child,
and she a very ancient lady. She lived in one of those horrible, dark
old Berlin flats, they were supposed to be elegant, but they were just
very dark, with long corridors, and the back rooms overlooked
cheerless back courtyards.
This particular old lady whose name was Aunt Jenny, a pretty
name for a nasty face, lived with a maid in cap and apron, and a
revolting fat pink and white slobbering pug dog, I remember feeling
totally surprised by everything I saw, because I had never been to an
old fashioned flat, and never seen such an old lady, and such a
disgusting dog,
Another relative
of my grandmother was a great, big fat lady, by the name of Aunt
Trude. She had a man's deep voice, and I thought her so horrible, that
when she came to see us, and I was about 5 or 6 years old at that time,
I opened the bottom drawer of the wardrobe in my room, and put my head
in, and could not be got out, until she left. My parents had a hard
time containing their laughter at this scene,
do not know how my grandparents met, but I am sure my
grandmother was very happy to find a way to get out of the clutches of
her nasty family, In those days, a girl from a middle-class family
could not just get up, and find herself a job, if she was unhappy at
home. Only in rare cases, could she study for a profession, if she had
a supporting and understanding family. The only girls and women who
worked, were members of the poor classes. They were expected to work.
But that was unthinkable for a Jewish middle-class girl, So marriage
provided an escape,
I have already described my grandfather He surely was an
attractive man for my grandmother, and she was not only beautiful,
but also very talented. She was a perfect housewife, too perfect
really, She could paint, draw, play the piano, she did exquisite
needlework. She was a perfectly brought up young lady. So I suppose
that in the beginning the marriage was a happy one, but by the time
was around, they seemed to live rather side by side than together. On
my grandmother's desk though, there was a photograph of my
grandfather as a young man, which seemed to me to be a sign of love and
care
There was a 13 year difference between their ages. This was