something I always heard mentioned. In my view I cannot think it would
affect a good marriage, I can only think that it was their difference
of temperament which created difficulties, My grandfather being a
calm, logical and scientific sort of person, and my grandmother
forever worrying about everything, which did not need worrying about
at all
I called this grandmother "Bunny Rabbit" because that was what
she called me, and when I talked about her, I called her Lise. One day
when I was still very small, my parents and I travelled by train from
Berlin to Elberfeld to see my grandparents, I was ever so excited at
the prospect of seeing them, and at that time I was a great
chatterbox, which stopped when I went to school, and all the way on
the journey I talked about Lise. In those days trains had closed
compartments for 8 people, and finally a gentleman sitting opposite
leaned over and asked, "Who is this Lise, you keep talking about?
Whereupon I replied, as I had presumably heard from my father; "She is
my Mother-in-Law!
Being the only grandchild, I was spoolt rotten. My grandmother
supervised my wardrobe, as if I had been a princess royal. She
embroidered the most loveliest dresses for me and dressed me up like
a doll with velvet dresses, lace collars and cuffs. In summer I had
printed muslin dresses with puff sleeves and huge collars. I even had
a black velvet winter coat with Ermine collar and cuffs! It was
incredible. I know my mother did not very much approve of this, but
she let her mother be,
At this stage I want to say that I loved "Bunny Rabbit" to
distraction, more than I loved my parents. She was so beautiful, and
so wonderful, I suppose it was the most pure love, I ever loved
anyone. My parents were always very careful with my education. Nobody
ever raised a voice, when I had done anything wrong or naughty.
Everything was most sensibly explained to me. Bunny Rabbit had a much
shorter temper, and she sometimes raised her voice, or told me what
she thought of me. But it did not matter one bit. I rather enjoyed
that I loved her so much, that I find it very hard even now, 60 years
later, to write about her, but I will do so in loving memory
As I already said my Grandmother was the perfect housekeeper.
Too perfect even. But then she had a large household to look after. My
grandfather's meals had to be on time, because of his very busy
schedule. So the household was very regimented, meals had to be
punctual. Grandmother, was an excellent cook, practically a chef. I
still have some of her recipes, and boy, on boy are they good She
worked very hard, although she had a live-in maid, who worked hard
too, and a woman who came in for cleaning once a week, who also worked
pretty hard. Directing this household was a full-time unpaid job.
From time to time, lots of colleagues of my grandfather were invited
for a sumptious lunch, and I can imagine what a state my grandmother
must have been in.
She also made lots of preserves, usually fruit, but in World War
I she preserved some chickens which my grandfather got as a payment
from a farmer, and put them in the larder. One day while the family
were at lunch, a loud explosion coming from the larder, had them all
on their feet in a minute. The chicken preserve had exploded!
Obviously the recipe had not been a good one, gases had developed in
the jars, and they had exploded. What a mess it must have made
With all this perfectionism in housekeeping, Bunny Rabbit
overdid it. When I saw Emmy (Dodo's mother) for the last time, which
was after my mother's funeral in October 1984, she told me that when
they were all young, Grandmother never found time to visit them,