because of "Work". Yet Emmy and her parents lived in Mannheim, a few
hours train drive away.
Bunny Rabbit was a slave to her household, which is surely an
impossible situation. One should never be a slave to anybody or
anything. To live in a clean, orderly house is certainly pleasant,
and really essential for hygienic purposes, and for making life
easier, but one must not overdo it to a point when you can't visit
your friends and relations, and when this over-fussiness creeps into
your conjugal relations, I would say that the motto is: A little less
scrubbing, a simpler cuisine and more leisure for human relations
will contribute to a happier life.
Bunny Rabbit was also over concerned about getting cancer,
because she had watched her mother die of it, which makes it
understandable. My grandfather explained to her in vain, that cancer
is not necessarily hereditary. She suffered from stomach pains, so I
always saw her taking powders. In those days, not so long ago, in the
thirties, people took powders which came in little square or round
cardboard boxes. The powders were measured by the teaspoonful, and
swallowed with water, the way we now take tables.
My grandfather probably quite correctly thought the stomach
pains were psychological in origin, and tried to talk her out of them.
But in vain. She took her powders, poor soul.
There is one lesson, I have learned from this story with the
dreadful end; Don't worry about things you don't know whether they
Poor Bunny Rabbit
will happen. Don't worry about unlaid eggs.
worried for years about getting cancer, yet what happened to her
unimaginable
finally: deportation, deprivation, humiliation,
misery, a probably terifying death, all this, mercifully she did not
imagine. It would have been child's game to die of cancer, instead of
being tortured and murdered.
As I have already mentioned I was the apple of my grandparents
eyes, and very spoolt by them. In the early 30ies my grandfather
bought a large house for me to inherit, and this is what caused their
bitter end.
The house was 3 floors high, had a huge cellar, and attic, and
between the ground floor and the 2nd floor there was an annex¬
consiting of a very elegantly wooden panelled washroom leading into a
semi-circular conservatory built into the garden. The conservatory
had a low window sill on which stoodflower pots filled with the most
beautiful plants. In the middle was a large round table at which we
took our meals.
The garden was small, surrounded by high ivy covered walls. The
back wall must have been at least as high as a 5-floor house. At the
back, along the top of it was another street. There was a cherry tree
in the garden, and lots of rhododendron shrubs. Leading down from the
garden were steps leading into a paved courtyard, which was in front
Bunny Rabbit always
of the kitchen, which was of huge dimensions.
chased everybody out of the kitchen, except the maid who worked in it.
She said that other people in the kitchen made her nervous. The other
people really were only my mother and myself. So it happened that my
mother never learned to cook. However, as my mother explained to me,
as she had studied chemistry, and physics, she could easily teach
herself cooking, and indeed she cooked very well, although quite
differently from her mother, and I cook differently again. My father
enjoyed both my mother's cooking and my own, but everytime he
remarked how differently we cooked. Yet I learned a lot of cooking
from my mother, who taught me in contrast to her own mother, and who I
had to replace when my mother was laid up with a very bad back and