touched, and which was not attractive anyway. Also my parents
befriendeed a young lady of huge proportions, (especially to me, who
was a very tiny child) who studied singing, and who came from time to
time to consult my parents, as an authority, about her singing. She
planted herself in our small living cum dining room, and started to
yell and howl. At least that was my opinion. And I thought it so
dreadful to watch, that I retired under the dining table, which was
covered with a heavy table cloth, and like a nice, cosy tent. My
father sang me arias from Mozart's Operas to me before going to bed. I
liked them, but obviously could not understand the scope of that
music.
So one day my mother put the disc of the Overture to "A Midsummer
Night's Dream" by Mendelssohn on the gramophone, and while the music
was playing, she told me about all the elves, and the rough people in
the play, and about Puck, and how you could hear all those people in
the music, and I just loved it, and have loved music ever since.
My mother also made me a beautiful dress from crepe paper, in
which I danced to that music on the last day of the year, in front of
all the family, celebrating the end of the old year.
Back to
From one side of the living room an arch led into the dining room
with its huge table, chairs, and immense cupboard on one side.
Everything in the dining room was black and dismal. Apparently those
pieces of furniture had been bought with the house. In the extension
of the dining room stood the grand piano. It was not much in use when I
was a child. It had been mostly for the use of Guenther, who had
absolute pitch, and could play the piano from a very early age, and
my mother as a child. Later, when Guenther and Thea lived in
Jerusalem, my grandparents sent it to them.
On the third floor was my grandparents bedroom, a huge bathroom,
with 2 washbasins, a large bath and one of those huge white linen
cupboards. At the bottom of the linen closet were 2 large drawers, and
in one of them I found a lot of card games for kids. One of them was
what was called a Quartet. This one was a poet's quartet. Each poet
had four cards alloted to him, and his works, and you had to get all
the 4 cards of one poet, and the more poets you got, the greater were
your chances of winning. I can still see myself, sitting on the
bathroom floor, going through the poets, whose birth and death days
were printed next to their names. To my horror, I found out that poor
old Shakespeare, of the lovely "Midsummer Night's Dream, had died on
his birthday!!!! I was immensely sorry for him, especially as he had
missed out on all those beautiful presents his family must have
prepared for him. At that time, I must have been around 10 years old.
in the second bedroom were 2 beds for my mother and myself
when we stayed there, a sewing machine, a wardroom with a large
mirror, a table and a few chairs, there was also a washbasin, and a
bird age on the window sill.
I was always sent to bed at 8 o'clock, but I remember it took me
or so it seemed, a long time to go to sleep. And later when I stayed
for a whole year with my grandparents, while my parents tried to
establish themselves in Paris, I remember being very frightened by
the Nazi troops marching past, singing bloodthirsty songs.
While I was staying for a year with my grandparents andmy
parents were trying their luck in Paris, I had an abcess on one
tonsil, and was kept in bed for one month in this very room, with the
finches singing their hearts our in their cage. Mygrandfather hoped
the abcess would go away on its own, but it did not.
Would you believe it, everyday he brought me a new present,