toys, books, children's papers, fruit. Spoilt rotten. After a while
he had 2 other doctors come in to look on my abcess. They mumbled a
lot, and I clearly remember my Grandfather saying: "On any other
child, I would recommend an operation, but not on this one." Still,
one cold, January afternoon, I was bundled up in warm clothes, and we
went to Hospital by taxi. I remember being sat on a nun's knees. She
held me tightly with her arms and legs. An ether mask was placed on my
face, I remember counting a bit, and off I was. When I came too, the
abcess was out, I took my Grandfather's hand, and we marched through
the long silent corridoors, down a huge staircase to a waiting taxi,
and drove home. I was well again, Friends came to see me, and said:
"How pale you are!" After a while, I had to go back to school again,
which I did not like.
Up in the attic there was a huge room with spare wardrobes,
tables, my mother and her brother's old toys, which consisted of a
doll's house which they had built from Meccano parts. It contained a
lift (elevator) which had been activated by some electrical machine.
Also there was something called "An electricity producing machine
You had to turn a handle, which set several wheels in motion and it
produced beautiful sparks. I don't know what else it did. There were 2
oblong wooden boxes, with sliding tops, which contained two
articulated dolls, about 20 cms. (8) long, and their huge wardrobe,
all hand sawn by my mother, Those dresses were exquisite with layered
skirts edged in lace and lace collars and ouffs
grandfather, also did
lot
and
photography,
developing, and when his children were young, he allowed them to work
with him in the darkroom, unlike Bunny Rabbit who chased them out of
the kitchen, and all that stuff was standing in one corner, as well as
a clothes mangle. At the end of this huge room, was the maid's room.
And still higher up, a ladder led to another attic, where all the
washing was hung, and a little room where there was a lot of spare
furniture including a rocking chair. Sometimes, when I felt very
adventrous I climbed up to the top, and sat in the rocking chair, but
I really felt frightened there, and expected a ghost to appear at any
moment.
What I did not think of, in those days was, what an appalling
job it was to carry the laundry all the way up from the cellar to the
attic to dry.
I remember however Bunny Rabbit complaining bitterly about
back pains, marching up and down the stairs all day, she had grown a
bit stout in those days, which did not make things easier. My mother
always held her up as a warning example what happened to a pretty
figure, if you don't exercise, and wore a corset. She told me her
mother wanted to put her quite needlessly into a corset at the age of
14 or so, and my mother blankly refused. Instead she went on long
walks, did rowing, tennis playing, later mountain climbing, and kept
her figure, while poor Bunny Rabbit expanded. I did a lot of
exercising, wore no corset, but also expanded in my late 50ies,
though not as much as Bunny Rabbit. But my mother once said that I am
starting to remind her of her mother, which I did not mind, but I
started to get on a diet, which helped.
Also Bunny Rabbit's glasses were never on the floor where she
was, so she rushed about the house chasing her glasses. Which
probably was quite healthy for her, but obviously she did not see it
that way. She did have 2 pairs, but in such a large house, she would
have needed at least 5 pairs.