I doubt Bunny Rabbit was ever happy in that house. It was far too
big. Looking back now with the wisdom of hindsight, and having lived
for 71 years on old planet earth, I must say, I wonder why my
Grandfather had ever bought it. What did he need such a large house
for? It must have cost a fortune. Not only that, but he bought it at a
time of rising antisemitism in Germany. In the thirties, the writing
on the wall must have been there for all to see. And I am also
convinced that my grandmother did not like the idea of buying this
house at all But unfortunately, I have a feeling that my grandfather
did what HE liked, and not pay any attention to what his wife said. He
probably thought she was a panicmaker. He seemed to have been quite
headstrong. As far as I can make out from my mother's remarks,
grandfather bought it for me to inherit. How he must have loved me to
do this. I appreciate it immensely, but with sadness in my heart too.
I am afraid he just burdened my conscience with something which I find
hard to come to terms with.
I am now jumping on to the year 1937, the year my parents and
myself had come to what was then "Palestine", an event of which I will
write later on, but it is part of the story of my grandparents, so I
must mention it here. My parents and myself lived together in one flat
with my mother's brother Guenther and his wife Thea, because that was
cheaper for both families. In those days life was atrociously
difficult, wages were hunger wages. Although my father was employed
by the Jewish Agency as a museum curator, he got a pittance, and even
for this his rightful salary, he had each month to go to the Jewish
Agency, and bang the table to get it, there being no trade unions at
the time. My mother tried to supplement the income by sewing sheep
skin slippers for an artist who made her living the same way, and just
did not have enough time to saw enough slippers. This artist's
husband was an architect and artist quite a famous one too (Leopold
Krakauer, known as "ElKa") but he did not earn enough either. That is
what life looked like in those days, especially for high qualified
cademics.
In 1938 my Grandparents came as tourist to visit us, and to see
how they could settle in Palestine, which was held as a Mandate by the
British Government. They only allowed a certain "quota" of Jewish
immigrants in. In order to enter legally you had to apply for a
"Certificate" You also had either to be recommended and vouched for,
or bring in 1000 Marks, which in those days was quite a lot of
money.
If you did not have either, you could come as a tourist, and
"vanish" into a Kibbutz, or Moshav, go into hiding for a while, and
later mingle with the rest of the population. Nobody really paid
attention to that.
The whole family urged my grandparents to stay on illegally, but
my grandfather would not hear of it. He was of the old school. In 1938
he was 77 years old, and set in his ways. He wanted to do things in
good German order. Sell the house, and come legally with 1000 Marks.
In vain, everyone told him that there was really no time for that. He
was sure he could do it, instead of having to live on the small income
of his children, that is, being dependent on them, and crowding
together in a small flat.
People tried to persuade him that it would be wiser, to leave
everything behind, and save their precious lives. A war with Germany
assure to break out within a short time. The writing was on the wall.
My poor grandmother who was only 64, pleaded that she would do any
job, cleaning, sawing cooking, baking, anything to earn a living,
but just be safe.