She cried and cried, but my grandfather insisted: "We return to
Germany and put our house." I suppose he could not imagine
that he, Dr. Wolfsohn, well known in Elberfeld for over thirty years,
and once, the revered chairman of the Medical Association of
Rhineland-Westfalia could be in danger from the Nazis. A strange lack
of realism, possibly due to old age.
Even when they entered the taxi which took them to Haifa to board
ther ship for the long journey back, the family tried to pull them
back
but my grandfather refused to stay.
Back in Germany they applied for a certificate to enter
Palestine legally. It arrived on the day the war broke out... It is a
most tragic story, and very hard for me to write down, but it part of
life, and must be recorded for posterity.
We heard from my grandparents through the "Red Cross Letter
Service" which ran a message service between enemy countries.
In the early 40ies my grandparents were forced to sell their
house, and its contents for a paltry nominal sum. They lived in a
room rented to them by a doctor, a colleaque of my grandfather, who
rather courageously took them in.
I have two Red Cross letters, or rather messages, a message was
only to be about family news of strictly personal character, and was
not to exceed 25 words. The first message was sent by my mother to her
mother on her birthday, on the 17th of September 1941. It says:" Thank
you for your birthday greetings, Today we are thinking of you with
heartfelt birthday wishes, We are all healthy, Marianne is attending
an arts and crafts school and is studying drawing and handweaving
The birthday greetings my
Heartfelt greetings to both of you.
mother was thanking them for, had been for my birthday
The answer of the recipient had to be sent on the reverse of
this message; It is dated 13th December 1941 (Which shows how long it
took these messages to go through) My grandparents wrote: "Highly
delighted that everyone is well, and about Marianne's choice for a
profession. We are well and healthy. We are expecting with great
longing the news about a happy family event. Heartfelt greetings.
The happy family event of the future was of course
Mother Father."
the birth of Gabriela, born 4th November 1942
Their last letter sent through the Red Cross, on the ist of
August 1942, before their deportation was addressed to their son
Guenther. The Red Cross letters were not sent through the regular
mail. They had to be fetched personally from the Red Cross Office, who
obviously sent a notice to that effect, I do not remember why I was
sent to fetch it. I do not even remember, if I was sent by my aunt Thea
or my mother, I only remember going to the Red Cross Office, housed in
a high rise building facing Montefore's famous windmill, which is
still a landmark in Jerusalem.
The message said;" On leaving Elberfeld we are sending
heartiest farewell greetings with best wishes for a happy future.
As soon as we will know our new address we will let you know. Father
That was the last we ever heard of them.
Mother.
On reading this message, I was totally shocked. I knew only too
53 years have passed
well what that meant. It was a last adieu.
since, but I can still see myself standing in the bright August
sunlight, on front of the tall skyscraper, facing the windmill,
blinded by tears, and observing unhappily that life around me went on
as ususal, as if nothing had happened. There were people walking
about, cars whizzing by the trees lining the avenue were gently
swaying in the breeze. Life went on as usual