As if people were not getting heartbreaking messages through the
Red Cross, and unimaginable atrocities were happening in that hell
that was Nazi Germany, happening to my dearly beloved grandparents,
to the beloved parents of my mother and my uncle!
I rushed home, but not to my mother, or to Guenther because I
thought that the pain of this message was too hard for them to bear.
I sought out Thea who was in the kitchen. I assume my father was out at
work, otherwise I would have gone to him. So I chose the next
I showed her the letter. I was
strongest person which was Thea.
crying, The told me to stop crying immediately, which I did. Nobody
must know I had been crying. She took the letter, and told me not to
tell anyone about it, "We will keep this to ourselves", she said. So
I kept my mouth shut, and went about life as if nothing had happenend,
but the contents of the letter, and the conclusion to be drawn from it
were within me all the time.
I shall be eternally grateful to Thea that she took matters,
wisely and firmly in hand, I suppose my parents and Guenther must have
realised after some time what had happenend, when no further messages
arrived. Perhaps Thea told them. Nobody ever mentioned the subject.
At least not to my knowledge. Perhaps it was kept from me. I don't
know.
After the war researches were made through the Red Cross
Research Service, A laconic, preprinted information sheet arrived
one day, saying that my grandparents had been taken to Theresienstadt
in July 1942 (which seems a mistake, as their last message had been
dated August), and from there, in September 1942 to Mali-Trostine in
Czechoslovakia. 2000 people were taken there, and only 103 returned.
My grandparents had not been among them.
It was only then that my mother talked to me about the message of
August 1942, and expressed her admiration that I had shut up about it.
But I think it wasn't so admirable, I had thought it had been the
least thing to do to spare her pain.
I always hesitated to speak to my mother about her parents,
although later on they were more and more mentioned in our
conversations. But we never mentioned their tragic end. But it was
there - hovering in the atmosphere. How did my mother cope with this
great pain? She was very wise, and certainly realised the futility of
torturing oneself with thinking about past events, which cannot be
changed, and that the living have to get on with their lives as best
as they can, which also a way of honouring one's ancestors.
At this juncture I would like to say that I have no wish
whatsoever to return to either Elberfeld or Berlin, My idea is that
once you have been thrown out, and quite without reason too, you stay
out, and let people have a bad conscience they threw you out in the
first place.
After World War II, the German not only realised to their
enternal shame that they had murdered 6 Million Jews and some Million
Gypsies, but they had also killed the elite of Germann
intellectuality, and that the spice of thought, a speciality of the
Jewish intellect had gone from German thought forever, A little late
revenge, and as my father taught me, the Italians say: "La vendetta si
mangia al freddo That is: "Revenge is eaten cold.