MY MOT HER.
My mother was born on the 19th of May 1898 in the little village
of Koenigswalde in East Prussia as I have already mentioned. She was
called Hilde Friederike. Her brother Guenter was born there too, two
years later in 1900.
As I have already said, my mother had very black curly hair, and
enormous dark eyes, very much like her father, and the daintest
upturned nose ever seen on a human face. Guenter looked very much
like his grandfather, the father of his father. His head had the same
shape. Somewhat lean and longish. He had brown hair and brown
eyes.
Both Hilde and Guenter were very gifted children in the fields
of science, mechanics, and music. They shared many activities. I
rember seeing what was called "An Electrifying Machine. It was made
up of wheels and shafts, quite a small machine, which was put on the
table. When you turned a handle, it produced beautiful sparks in all
colours of the rainbow, flying out of one of the wheels. These sparks
They had also built a doll's house,
had a particularly nice smell.
from a Meccano set. It was several floors high, had electric light,
and a lift powered by batteries. It had furniture, and little dolls in
it as well, some of them made by the children.
Their father also allowed them to assist him in his darkroom
where he developed his own photographs, which he took mostly on a
stereo camera. They were developed on glass slides, with the same
picture right and left, and viewed through a special viewer, like a
binocular, and the photographs could be seen as 2-dimensional.
I have already written how my mother sewed the most exquisite
dresses for her little dolls. Both children played the piano from a
very early age on, and did little compositions. Guenter had an
absolute pitch and was unusually gifted musically,
Here is a charming incident in the lives of my mother and her
brother; The town of Elberfeld was situated in a hollow, surrounded
by wooded hills. The family used to walk a lot in these woods, on
Sundays, or on free afternoons. In winter it snowed regularly.
Everything was covered in deep snow, I remember how as a child of six
we walked on the roads and paths of those woods, which were packed
with solid snow you could walk on. But if you stepped out of the path,
you were in really deep snow, and I remember standing waist deep in
the snow!
So in winter you took your wooden sleigh - you had to pull it up
the hillside - and went to the top of the woods, and then you sat on
the sleigh, usually two or three people, depending on the length of
the sleigh, and slid down the whole length of the large path in the
wood, until you came to the nearest houses. These houses, mostly
villas, where still on higher ground than the town itself, and you
could slide down even further on the pavement, until you came to the
more crowded places.
When my mother and her brother were children, they took their
sleigh up the hill, and joyfully glided to town. One day they had the
idea of taking a shortout through a lane which was closed to traffic,
when lo and behold they met a policeman waiting for them at the foot
of the steep lane. "Don't you children know it is forbidden to ride
on this lane?" he asked them. Alas, yes, they knew, "Right", said the
policeman,"I have to take down your names, and address", and he took
out his little notebook and pencil, and asked them for their names.
"Are you the children of
"Hilde and Guenter Wolfsohn, they said.
Dr. Alfred Wolfsohn?
Yes, they said, "we are.