"How sad" said the policeman, closed his notebook, and "Off you
go this time", he said, "but don't let me catch you again!
Which shows you how well known and beloved my grandfather was. And
nobody ever found out, why the policeman was sad. Whether it was
because a revered person like Dr. Wolfsohn, had such naughty
children, or whether he did not have a "case
On summer holidays the family went to nice places by the
seaside, or into the mountains of Germany and Switzerland.
When my mother went to High School, she was already much in
demand as a mathematician by her fellow pupils. She went to school by
tram, where she met her schoolmates with unfinished homework, and she
helped them finish it. Once, when she was preparing for the final
exams, she worked so hard that she fainted at her desk. She woke up,
lying on the floor. As this was in the year 1916, right in the middle
of World War 1, it could be that she did not get enough of the right
food. Although during the war, my grandfather was paid in kind by the
farmers who lived around Elberfeld, and who were his patients. So
usually the family got butter, cheese, eggs, and chickens.
Mother also had an excellent drawing teacher who taught her more
than some people learn at an art school. When my mother finished
school, she found it heard to decide which subject she wanted to
study: Arts, crafts or mathematics. Mathematics won the contest, and
she decided to study at the University of Mannheim, in the south of
Germany. In those days students went to the university where there
was a particular good teacher in their chosen subject, and if the
favourite professor moved to another University, his students
followed him to that university. So I think my mother chose to study
at the University of Mannheim, because there must have been a good
maths teacher there.
My grandmother was rather scared at thought that her little
daughter was going to live all on her own, in the middle of the war, in
a strange town, But my mother wasn't scared in the least.
She had always been a very progressive woman, and a very logical
At the age of 12 her mother wanted her to wear a corset,
person.
because that was done in those days. But my mother, very sensibly
refused, and pointed out to her mother, that wearing a corset causes
flabby muscles, and a bad posture. Instead she played tennis, rowed,
and went on rambles, which the whole family did anyway. All of which
did her a great deal of good. In the same way, her mind told her that
it was probably no worse living in Mannheim than in Elberfeld.
In Mannheim she rented a room in a "pension", a boarding house,
run by two elderly spinsters. One morning my mother woke up, looked
out of the window, and lo and behold!!! some buildings on the other
side of the road had been badly hit by night-bombing! My mother had
slept soundly through it! When the alarm had sounded, which my mother
did not hear either, the 2 spinster dashed into the cellar, together
with other lodgers who had also woken up, but nobody seemed to have
thought about my mother, as usual she had been right to have had a
good night's sleep.
My mother had always been a sound sleeper, except for the last
few years of her life, a life full of great shocks to the system, and
terrible events. She used to take a Mogadon (a sleeping pill) but I
always wondered if it had any real effect on her, after such a long
time, and whether she wasn't sleeping her own sleep after all, as even
in her old age, she was still a very harmonious, sensible, well
balanced being, in spite of all the adversities in her life.