From Mannheim, my mother at some stage during her student days,
moved to the University of Munich. She was studying mathematics,
physics and chemistry, and had to take an additonal subject. She
chose philosophy. It was at the philosophy lectures that my parents
met. This is what my parents, told me about, the course on
philosophy:
The professor held the course, sitting at one end of an oblong
table. He had long hair, of which he was obviuosly very vain, as he
kept stroking it with his hands looking very superior to the rest of
the poor, benighted humanity.
One of his favourite subjects was:
The False Conclusion. In order
to demonstrate how easily one can
reach a false conclusion, he said the following: "It is said that all
artists have long hair.
I have long hair, and at this point he
voluptuously stroked his mane,
therefore I am an artist. False
conclusion!
But he must have been either lecturing on some highly
complicated, and intricate ways of thought, or he was not very good
at presenting his subject matter, because most students did not quite
understand what he was talking about, or at least, not everything.
Only one did, and that was my father who was very good at interpreting
meanings of complicated subjects. So after the lecture all the
students gathered round my father, who explained the professor's
lecture.
During the lecture my father sat right opposite my mother at
that famous oblong table. He saw the prettiest girl in the world:
A delicate oval face, encircled by a mass of black curly hair. Huge
dark eyes, slanting upwards, a delicate small, upturned nose, and a
bewitching smile, showing pearly little teeth. She was petite and
delicate, and in great contrast to the large heavy German girls,
among which she looked like an exotic flower, And she was highly
intelligent too.
Because of her exotic looks, some people thought she came from
Russia, or the Far East, and she told me that some students tried to
befriend her because they thought she could provide them with stamps
from far-off countries. Remember that in those days the world was not
as "Small" as it is today, You could not fly anywhere within 24 hours.
It took lengthy train and boat journeys to get anywhere.
She also had a tough time warding off unwanted attentions,
because of her unusual looks. She did not care about boy friends.
But my father was different. It was not surprising that my father
fell in love with my mother That my mother fell in love with my
father just showed her wisdom in finding the suitable person.
My father was good looking too, with warm, brown velvety eyes,
an aquiline nose, and a sensitive mouth. In those days he was going
through a very romantic stage. He wore his hair long (this was right
after World War I, in the very early 1920ies) a huge hat with immense
borders, and a cape like a cavalier. It did look dashing, but probably
also a bit funny and unrealistic to my mother, who was quite a
realist. So was my father, but he liked to dress up in those days. She
realised however, that beneath the costume there was a valuable
personality, a man of great integrity, intelligence, wit and vision.
She also noticed his hands which were unusually beautiful; long
tapered fingers covered in supple flesh with elegantly shaped long
nails.
My mother always told me to watch people's hands, because she
said: "They can tell you a lot about a person's personality." So
obviously, my father had the right kind of hands.