7
They eventually got married while they were still students, at
that time in Heidelberg, in the year 1923. My grandparents did not
approve of their daughter's marriage. In their eyes my father was a
penniless, unpractical person whose subject: Art History, was
useless, for, earning money, and who associated with doubtful
characters, like artists, musicians and writers, who in those days
were associated with "Starving in garrets". Also my father was a bit
of a radical and revolutionary in his outlook, and not conservative
as my mother's parents.
However, my mother did what she considered the right thing to
do, like in her choice of studies, and my grandparents bowed to the
inevitable.
My father who was 32 by the time they married, evidently had had
quite a bunch of lady friends before he met my mother, and some of
those ex-girl friends we met later in Israel. My goodness me: they
were no match for my mother. They had not grown up, or aged
gracefully. And I used to congratulate my father on his good choice,
and lucky escape.
My father's mother, about whom I shall write later, told me how
my father introduced his bride to her. She said;" In came the
prettest young lady with the loveliest smile, carrying a small
basket with freshly picked flowers, which she had made up for me. I
was quite carried away by this charming apparition". The two ladies
remained the best friends for ever after.
Now here is a little story, which is a bit of a digression, but
which I will write down right here, where it belongs in time, to show
you, how old our connections with the Francke family are: My parents
were still living in rented rooms. So they had lunch at a private
house, where the owner, to supplement her income, served lunch to a
certain number of regular customers (as many as could gather round
her dinner table probably). This was done by many people in those
destitute days. It was called a "Mittagstisch, which means:
Lunchtable. Food in such a place was probably cheaper and better than
in a restaurant. The lady of this particular "Lunchtable" where my
was no other than Mrs Francke, Hans's and Kurt's
parents went to
mother. After their stay in Heidelberg, my parents and Mrs. Francke
never met again until 1946 in Israel when I had just been married to
Uri Spanjer-Herford, and we rented a room from her in Givataim, at
that time, a suburb of Tel Aviv. So my friendship with the Franckes
dates from that time.
After this digression, back to my mother. When both my parents
had finished their studies, they moved to Berlin, Probably because my
father had a job there. As I have written before; my mother went to
Elberfeld for my birth, and then returned to Berlin with her new baby.
Here is a story she told me about that time: My parents lived in
a rented flat in a house with a lovely garden. When the weather was
nice, my mother put the pram with myself inside, into the garden for
fresh air. Apparently I was a very restless energetic baby, and used
to rock about in the pram, shaking the vehicle like a storm-tossed
boat at sea. But apparently the pram, although it was on quite high
wheels, but very large ones, never toppled over. It looked a bit
precarious, but it was safe. One day there was a ring at my parent's
door, a nice, middle aged lady, introduced herself as a neighbour.
She said she was doing professional needlework, working for many
hours, sitting at her window. Whenever she took her eyes off work, and
looked into the garden, there was this madly shaking pram and she
simply could not take it any more, she had to warn my mother of the
danger of the pram over turning over. My mother calmed her fears, and
proved to her, by the laws of physics, that the pram could not topple
over which in fact it never did.