After living in that house at some stage my parents moved into
the flat which I remember living in as a child, It was situated in a
huge block of flats, 3 floors high. The block formed a square around
a courtyard planted with grass. The courtyard was purely ornamental.
Nobody was allowed into it. It was a typical German "Verboten
(prohibited) zone. It would have been too noisy with kids playing
there, and people sitting around talking Mediterranean fashion, or
even like a public square anywhere else in the world, except in
Germany.
The whole block had 4 or 5 entrances on each street and was
built of white brick. On each floor there were 2 flats. Each flat had
a balcony. Above the the third floor ran the attic all built in rough
wood, and partitioned off into rooms. Each flat had a room to itself,
as a store room, and there was a large common room for hanging up the
washing.
A caretaker, called Muselius, looked after, the houses,
presumably cleaning and keeping things in good repair, and also
sweeping up the dead leaves falling off the trees lining the street.
I remember how for the first time I was aware of the leaves falling in
autumn, and being worried about it. But my parents told me that after
expressing my concern. I immediately comforted myself with the
words: "Never mind. Uncle Muselius will hang them back again.
Our flat was on Schoenhauser Street 18. It consisted of a
bedroom, and a living/dining room with a balcony to the front, and
my room, a room for the live-in- maid, a bathroom, and a kitchen
all to the back, All the rooms were connected to the fairly large
entrance hall, in which there was a swing for me. On the balcony wild
vines were growing in boxes. They provided shade and privacy, and in
autumn turned into the most gorgeous shades of red, yellow, brown and
green. In one corner of the balcony there was a drain hole on the
For some reason, I loved to
floor, for the rain water to flow off.
sweep the balcony floor with a handbrush. One day, the handbrush got
stuck in the drainhole. It frightened me very much. Perhaps I
identified with the brush. I ran to my mother terrified, and
said; "The brush is scared." Obviously my mother knew what it was all
about, and rescued the poor brush, and all was well.
I was also scared to death of going down the drain of the bath,
but while I was having my bath, stories were told to me, and I forgot
about it.
Both my mother and my father were busy working in those days. My
mother was a teacher at a girl's school, which was quite a tram's
journey away on the other side of Berlin, She had to leave the house
at around 7 in the morning, and came home around 2pm, laden with
exercise books to correct. In those days the exercise books had a hard
cover, prettily covered in multi-coloured marbled paper. They
looked nice, but they were incredibly heavy to carry, and I assume
that carrying these heavy books laid the foundation to mother's bad
back. She had always been of a very delicate build.
It had not been simple being Jewish, to become a teacher in the
early 20ies in Germany. My mother had passed her Ph.D. with flying
colours. A note in her Ph.D. certificate reads: "She distinguished
herself by unusual perspicacity and clearness of mind.
In order to become a teacher, she had to pass State Teacher's
Examinations. After having failed these twice for no apparent
reason, an inquiry showed that antisemitic examiners failed her,
because she was Jewish. This was in 1925, during the Weimar Republic.
She was offered apologies, and was immediatley passed without
further test.