The next day, she was offered a job, as good math teachers were
rare after World War I
There was also a shortage of English teachers and she was
asked to teach English as well. She had studied it at school, but it
really was not her subject. So she brushed up her English with the
help of a book called;"1000 words of English" It was full of cartoons
with English captions underneath, together with the phonetics, and
the translation into English. My mother must have studied it when I
could already read a bit, because I remember looking into the book. On
the first page there was a drawing of two ladies having tea at a
table. Underneath it said: "Please give me the sugar." This was the
first English sentence I learnt, and the only one I remember from that
time.
Although my mother taught such a difficult subject as higher
mathematics at a girl's school, she was much beloved by her students.
Not only was she an excellent teacher, she had a fascinating
personality, and was exceedingly pretty. I have a group photograph
of her with one of her classes. There they were, all those huge, buxom
German girls, and in front; my mother, quite small and dainty.
I also have a note smuggled by girls around the classroom, which
my mother intercepted. It contains possible solutions to a problem,
and also saying;" Schiffchen (meaning little ship) is sweet, I love
her". Two or three of these girls came to see her privately, just for
friendship. Mother corresponded with one of them, Erika Carius, till
the day she died, interrupted only by the war. After the war she heard
from Erika again, Erika had been working throughout the war. Her
husband had been exempt, from military, service, because of
tuberculosis and diabettes, Right after the war they were short of
insulin. So mother managed to send her some insuline Erikas husband
thanked her after she had faithfully nursed him through the hardships
of the war, by leaving her for another woman. But happily after some
time she met a very nice, suitable man, and both lived happily
married, until he died. After my mother's death, I continued the
I got a note from her
correspondance with Erika, until one day,
daughter, Corinna Loeffler, telling me she had died. I continue a
sort of vague correspondence with Corinna, but we really don't know
each other, and she is after all some 25 years or so younger than
I am
To return to those Berlin days. As both my parents were working,
we had a maid. At first my mother got an old fashioned person, who
wore long black skirts and an old fashioned black hat tied under the
chin with ribbons. She was apparently a superior cook, everything in
the house shone, but one day my mother returned unexpectedly early
from work, and she found this woman, beating me, because I had messed
up "Here clean floor, by playing on it.
Mother dismissed her on the spot. She phoned around, and that
very same day she found Betty. Betty was a country girl, very fat, not
very clean. The only food she cooked well was pot roast, because she
liked it, Mother taught me that people only cook well the food they
like. Betty's vegetables were drowned in water. Dishes were left in
the kitchen for 24 hours until the next morning, BUT she and I became
the best of friends. She was so good with me, that Mother put up with
all the rest of her shortcomings, because Betty was a better
pedagogue than any of her colleagues at school, and was good for
me.
When my parents went out at night, which they frequently did,
Berlin being at that time a very intellectual city, with lots of
concerts, shows etc. going on, I was allowed to sit up late with Betty.