I sat on the kitchen table, combing Betty's hair, pretending to
be a hairdresser, and I dare say, we both enjoyed ourselves.
Each week, Betty bought a housekeepers magazine from a chemist
on the other side of the road. What interested me was that it
contained a puzzle drawing which you had to turn around and over to
find a hidden shape, like the gamekeepers dog, or the children's
ball, I was looking forward to that each week. One day Betty said she
was too busy to get the magazine, would I get it for her? The trouble
was, that I was scared stiff of going into the street on my own, I was
afraid of the wicked boys lurking there to beat little girls up.
However I wanted the magazine so much, that I went, And that was what
Betty had wanted. She wanted me to find a motivation to go down to the
shop. Later in the day I heard her and my mother talking this over,
and my mother was quite surprised that I had really ventured out
alone, and expressed her admiration to Betty.
I know this is supposed to be a chapter about my mother, but I
think this is a good opportunity to remember a wonderful person.
My father in those days was a rather left-wing socialist, and he
wanted me to see that not everybody lived in a comfortable condition
like we did. So he sent me with Betty to see her family, who lived in
what was then called in Berlin, a back-court house. You had to walk
through the arch of a rather pompous looking front house, walk
through the courtyard, and came to a poorer dwelling.
Betty's brother, I think it was, lived with his family in a
ground floor flat without electricity. They had one room, a small
kitchen and a bathroom, all very dark and dingy. For the first time
in my life I saw that people had a bed in their living room. It wasn't
just a sofa, It was a heavy wooden large bed with a white lacy cotton
bedspread. They lit a petrol lamp, the first one I ever saw, in the
early afternoon, because it got dark there very early.
I remember one day a few young people were dancing in that room
to the tune of a grammophone in spite of all the furniture, and one
girl sat down on a pile of records!!! but everybody laughed. Just a
few were broken, and everybody repeated the German proverb" Broken
bits bring luck.
In the flat next to them lived a girl, a little older than I was,
and she came over to play with me, when we visited. I was told her
mother left her alone most of the day, and she was happy to have some
company. One day I saw the mother on her way out. She was rather plump
and what I thought, very elegantly dressed, and had a lot of make up
on her face, which was something not done in those days by the women
of my parents friends and family.
Of course in those days, I did not know what that woman was. I
only wondered why she left her poor daughter at home alone, and went
out gorgeously dressed. I suppose the fact that I was playing with a
prostitutes daughter was certainly kept, maybe from my parents, and
certainly from my two grandmothers who would surely have had blue
fits.
One day the visits, which had not been frequent anyway, ceased
completely, and I overheard a how Betty told my parents, that her
nephew Willy, had been taken to a concentration camp, because he was
communist. He was never heard of again.
Betty had a fiance whose name was Karl Karl was mostly out of
work. The unemployment in Germany at that time was horrendous, and it
was the basis for the Nazi regime's success, as they provided work for
the people. Betty and Karl did not have enough money to get married,
and they were in their late 30ies already.