2
Karl smoked, which nobody in our family did, and he gave me film
star's pictures from the cigarette boxes. I thought these film stars
were absolutely gorgeous, and remember particularly admiring Lilian
Harvey.
When in 1933 our household broke up, Betty had to leave us.
Apparently my mother kept up a correspondance with her. We heard,
that poor Karl, had died from a burst appendix, and poor Betty was
left alone in the world. In her last letter, before the war she wrote
to my mother, how hard it had been for her, after we left. She never
found a good place, I suppose she was too old, too slow, not very
tidy, and people did not have the courage to confide their children to
her, as my mother had done. Or maybe such an opportunity had never
repeated itself. She was working on a farm when she wrote her last
letter, and was deeply unhappy having to work with animals, which she
hated. But it was the only job she could find. And after the war, we
never heard from her again, I hope life had not been too bad for her in
her old age, but with the war in Germany you can never tell. She was a
great lady, and she, like many other good people had deserved a better
fate. At least as long as I live, she will live on in my memory, and I
do think of her with love.
While we were living in Berlin, my mother and I visited her
parents for the Easter and Christmas holidays. On one occasion, at
Christmas, she gave me my first experience in classical music. My
grandparents had a sumptuous gramophone in a cabinet. Mother put on
Mendelssohn's "Overture to the Midsummer's Night. Dream". She
explained to me about the fairies dancing, about the rough people
trying to stage a play, about Titania falling in love with bottom,
about Puck skipping about in the woods, doing mischief, and how you
could hear it in the music. From that time on, I became interested in
classical music. My mother had made a very clever choice in
introducing me to it with a piece I could visualise, Also I loved to
dance to the music. So my mother made me a lovely costume of yellow
crepe paper with a long skirt, and a blonde wig of some artificial
stuff, and on New Year's Eve I danced in that costume to the
"Midsummer Night's overture in front of the family.
Later I found a book in my grandmother's bookcase about the "Young
Beethoven" and another one about Mozart. They were pretty kitschy.
but I loved them. I also found a game of cards called quartet, about
poets and writers. Each writer had 4 cards with all the relevant
dates written on them, and during the game you had to assemble as many
writers as possible. To my dismay I found out that poor Shakespeare
had died on his birthday!! The poor man. And what about all those
presents his family had bought for him. He could not enjoy them any
more, I was very shocked.
Also, there were very large albums with beautiful coloured
The
pictures telling the stories of operas and various dramas.
pictures had benn collected by my mother and her brother when they
were children. They came together with tins of "Libby's Meat Extract
whatever that was. In this way I was introduced to Classical Opera
and Drama.
Moreover, my grandfather in his youth, had collected the works
Goethe and Schiller, which came in regular installments of
of
collected all the leaflets they were
leaflets. When you had
opulently bound in gold embossed covers. This edition of Goethe and
Schiller was richly illustrated, and I just loved the pictures, and
as I wanted to know what was going on, I read as much as I could
understand of the contents, and became quite learned.