82
During the summer holidays mother and I went on trips, with my
grandparents, I remember the beach at Knocke in Belgium where I rode
on a donkey with a sheepskin for a saddle. We went to the Black Forest
where the women wore gorgeous costumes with white aprons and flat
strawhats with three red pompoms on them. We stayed at a hotel on the
edge of a forest. The owners of the hotel had a little dachshund,
named Rascal, who loved to take walks with us. He also took walks on
his own. One day he came home shot in the ear, by some hunters or the
gamekeeper and my grandfather treated him for the wound
I remember going to Switzerland to a place on the Lake of
Lucerne, called Seligsberg, And when I returned to Seligsberg 30
years later, they still had the same black and yellow striped boating
houses on the shore. You would think nothing ever changed in
Switzerland. It is a comforting thought, and the Swiss should be a
happy people having been spared two atrocious wars, but they are not.
They complain like everybody else. We went to the Glacier of the Rhone
which impressed me for life. My father always stayed home, because he
had to work.
Life went on like that until 1933. My mother lost her job, to
the great sorrow of the headmaster of the school where she worked. He
was obliged to dismiss her, who was one of his best teachers. It must
be said in honour, that he was a decent person who felt deeply ashamed
about this racist situation.
My mother found a job at a Jewish school, but she found it very
hard, because of the total lack of discipline in that school. The
atmosphere was totally different to a German school. She also became
a private tutor to some Jewish girls, and was appalled at the way
these children were pampered at home, being served on hand and foot
and their every whim catered to.
Then my father had leave Berlin in the very clothes he stood in,
because the Nazis sought him as a suspected communist. He went to
Paris where he had French cousins. My Mother was left all alone in
this dreadful climate to sort things out. We were lucky that the
Nazis did not retaliate on the families of persons they were after, as
they later did. I was sent to Elberfeld to my grandparents, while
mother cancelled the lease on our flat, packed, and sold part of the
furniture. It was at that occasion that her back started to become
very bad from physical exertion. It must have been a dreadful time for
her, her only help stemming from her unusual courage and rational
thinking.
Then she went to Paris to be with my father. They lived in a
shabby hotel, trying to find work, an impossible task, as foreigners
were not given work permits. The unemployment situation was just as
bad in France as it was in Germany. They lived from money sent by my
grandparents, and from the charity of my father's French cousins.
Somehow they managed to be able to rent a flat, in a Paris
suburb, in Sevres. There was a downtown Sevres, with shops, churches
and Sunday markets. When you came out of that centre, and walked up a
very steep hill you came to the residential quarter. We lived on top
of the hill in the "Rue da la Justice" (The street of justice) The
houses in that street were all 2 or 3 floors high and mostly private
homes in very large gardens, surrounded by high walls. There were
also some more modest dwellings, and that is where we lived. The house
had once been a one family house, and was divided into flats. The
landlords lived on the ground floor. We had a flat on the second floor
on the right, and on the opposite side of the landing lived a young
couple, called Tessier.