23
Mr. Tessier worked on the Metro (underground or subway). He was
the man who blew the whistle for the train to start after everybody
had got in. Madame Tessier worked as a cleaning lady. They had a
radio, which we had not, and you could hear it sometimes through the
thin wall between the two flats, playing current hits, which I
loved.
Our flat consisted of a large sunny room facing the huge back
garden. In that room were two sofa-beds for my parents, our Berlin
kitchen table with some chairs, and my father's desk. On one wall
there was a fireplace, but my parents had put a cast iron stove into
it, for better heat, You could boil water, and roast chestnuts on its
top, and see the lovely red glowing coals through a small door with a
mica window. In winter my mother put a red glazed brick on top of the
stove. This became red hot, and was wrapped in a thick piece of
flannel, which became quite singed over the years, and was placed at
the foot of the bed to keep your feet warm. The stove was the only
heating we had, until the landlord put in central heating just one
year before we left. At the rear end of the large room, was a tiny room
with just space enough for a sofa bed and a chair. That is where I
slept in winter, because it was warm.
On the other side of the corridor was another room with a bed and
a wardrobe, both from the Berlin bedroom, in lovely Art Nouveau style
furniture, done in body varnish the colour of ivory. Wouldn't I give
my eye teeth to have inherited them, as was done in an orderly world.
But the world has been torn out of its order (except for the
Swiss world, where material things don't change) and we must cope as
best as we can. This room faced the street, and that is where I slept
in summer, and not in winter, because it had no heating. I remember
sitting on the window sill, leaning on the iron window guard (French
windows are very long, and stop nearly at the floor, and have these
beautiful cast iron guards) dreaming of a glorious future, as very
young girls do.
Between the rooms was a narrow corridor leading from the front
door. At the end of the corridor was the kitchen. As there was no
bathroom, and my mother refused to wash in the sink, a wash basin was
installed in one free corner of the kitchen, and a screen put in front
of it, so that one could wash in privacy
The toilet was outside on the landing. It had two bolts to lock
the door. One was for the day, another one was for the night. It lit
the light at the same time you bolted the door. There was no other
light switch. A typical French invention. The French are quite
ingenious at inventing gadgets and money and labour saving devices.
In this case, you could never forget to switch the light off, when you
left the toilet. Very clever
As you can read, this flat was a bit of a comedown to what my
parents were used to. In those days I was too young to wonder about
what was going on in my parents' minds. I knew, we were poor, and
resented it somewhat. But my lovely parents did everything to make my
life as normal to me as possible. They obtained a free place in a
marvelous (but very expensive) Montessori School. We went on
wonderful walks in a nearby glorious wood with a lake, the same lake
where the famous French painter, Camille Corot (1796-1875) had his
house, and painted his enchanting pictures. Every Sunday when the
entrance was free to museums, and parks we went to the Paris museums
and to Versailles, which gave me quite an education.
But I wonder what went on in the heads of my parents, reduced to
the state of being unemployed, in spite of their magnificent
qualifications and be dependent on the charity of their cousins?