24
My father had an enormous buoyancy to his nature, an unlimited
optimism, and never lost his sense of humour, even in the worst
situation. His motto was: Never give up. "Just go on."
But my mother? What upheld her was probably my father's constant
unwavering optimism, good humour, courage and cheerfulness, and of
course her own rare intelligence, and the daily routine of life.
My mother's cousin Emmy (Dodo's mother also lived in Paris. She
was married to a German gentile who worked for a large German Chemical
Industry (IG Farben) in Paris, They lived in a beautiful flat in
Paris, and we were frequently invited. We were also invited to my
father's various 3 cousins. One was Rene Schiff, married to a
Rumanian lady, Lilly, who stood out because she overdid her make-up
in flamboyant colours. Rene was a dealer in pearl, like most of the
Schiff brothers. They lived in a real old fashioned Parisian
flat with a dining room going out at the back to a dark courtyard.
All the front rooms, and there were many, ran into each other,
Parisian style, so that all the important rooms were looking out into
the street. Everything was furnished Rococo style, which I thought
wonderful. We were there quite frequently for lunches.
Sometimes there were other members of the family there too with
children, I remember one particular afternoon when there was a little
girl there, younger than myself, who took me by the hand and explored
all the rooms without any inhibition, which I thought strange. In the
bedroom, she found a box on a bedside table with small balls of all
colours of the rainbow, "Oh, bonbons "(sweets) she said, and stuffed
a couple into her mouth. She nearly choked, and spat them out quickly,
because the were glass balls!!
Another cousin was Arlette, a lady of great vivacity and charm,
just married to Jean Tromeur, an interior architect. He was a self
educated man who had risen to his profession from being a Breton
country lad. I remember how once over lunch, which he liked to cook
himself, he told us, how as a child when he had first come into a house
with stairs, he went up on all fours, because he had only be used to
ladders. At the time we were in Paris, Janick was born, and I remember
her as a new born baby
Another cousin was Suzanne who lived on her own, after having
been divorced from her German Jewish husband. Her flat had been
designed by Jean Tromeur, her brother in law. It was a dream of a
modern flat all done in sky blue.
Various other Jewish refugees used to turn up at our house. Some
very hard up indeed, others seems to be a little better off,
were
In 1938 my father saw that not only was life hopeless in Paris,
but the signs of a world war were on the horizon, and this time the
Jews would have to pay for it particularly dearly, although I dare say
some people suffered just as much. Anyway, my father decided to get
out of France, which he rightly thought would be overrun by the
Germans. He did not like the English, something he later came to
change his mind about, so the only place he could think of was what
was then Palestine.
If a person who wished to emigrate to Palestine had 1000 Marks,
he could get on a list to get a certificate of entry. My parents were
as poor as churchmice. My father had various Zionist, connections
from his younger days, when he had been a member of the Jewish Labour
Party together with such personalities as Chaim Arlosorof. He tried
to get their help which took ages, and umpteen letters of refusal, All
these letters I found in a huge file after my mother's death. They
made the most awful depressing reading. Nothing but refusals.