85
All doors were shut. It must have been terrible for my parents.
Among others, my father got in touch with Nahum Goldman, a great,
outstanding Zionist. It was thanks to Nahum Goldman that we got into
Palestine, and he got my father a job at the Betsalel Museum of Art, I
shall write more about that in the chapter on my father, and also more
about his relatives.
My father went on ahead to Jerusalem and once more my mother was
left to clear the house on her own. It must have been a terrible time
for her. In spite of all the poverty, she liked living in Sevres. Also
twice a year we, that is to say, my mother and I, travelled to see her
parents. Even in those days it was dangerous, after having emigrated,
to return to Germany. My father was always worried when we went. One
day we were all ready to go, when we heard of a Jewish mother and child
who had been on the train from Paris to Germany, and were arrested on
the border, and never heard of again. So the trip was cancelled
To go to the Middle East, far away, into a completely strange country
must have been very hard for my mother. Maybe she thought she would
never see her parents again. It was a very hard time for my mother to
pack up again, to leave half of her belongings and to head for a
country which some people described perhaps in rosy colours, but
others, more realistically, as a very harsh and difficult place to
live. A country where they spoke a language unknown to her, and of a
extremely hot climate, which she abhorred. Also she had never been a
Zionist, and had no connections to this movement and ideas. The only
things that must have helped her were her wisdom her relatively young
age of 39 her belief and love of my father, and the sensibility of the
idea to escape antisemitism and war, But to have to leave her parents
in this situation, must have been an intolerable thought.
So once more our little bits of furniture were sold, as we were
to get new and more suitable ones in Jerusalem. the rest of the
belongings were packed in a few packing cases. At that time, I was
taken away from school, which was heartbreaking for me, because I
loved it, had friends there, and felt marvelously at home there. It
was a very traumatic experience for me, and one which I probably never
got quite over, I lodged for a week or so with Emmy and Dodo, and then,
it was a very cold February, my mother and myself, went by train to
Turin, and from there, I think to Genova where we took a boat, the
"Gerusalemme" to Haifa. The crossing was very rough, I did not feel
too well, which I tried to overcome by writing a novel in a copybook,
Most people were quite seasick, except the captain of the ship and my
mother who promenaded on the deck.
One morning we docked at Haifa port, and looking over the
railing, we saw my father down below, waiving to us. This picture is
quite clearly etched in my mind. We went to a restaurant where we had
a vegetarian bake, which was strange to me, and everything else
looked very strange too. The houses, the people were obviously very
different from France. I remember going by bus to Jerusalem, which in
those days was a lengthy trip, the bus groaning all the way uphill,
barely making it, I saw Arab shepherds looking pretty miserable, by
the roadside, Arab villages, looking no better, and the Egged bus
terminal in Jerusalem seemed the craziest place on earth.
As my parents had practically no money, they took a flat,
together with my mother's brother Guenther, and his wife Thea, in
order to economise. Guenther had had a position as a physicist in the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem for a couple of years, and he probably
had quite a decent salary.