86
My father obtained a position as a curator in the Betsalel
Museum. It had been set up by the Jewish Agency and was housed in a
lovely old style Jerusalem building, which had once been Boris
Schatz's Arts and Crafts School, and its exhibits consisted mostly of
Jewish ritual objects. The Director, Mr.Mordehai Narkiss was an
extremely knowledgable expert in these objects but not an art
historian. There were 2 floors of exhibitions, and the rest of the
rooms were used as storerooms, and there was a huge hangar, which had
been the weaving School, and at the time my father arrived, was full
of junk. Mr. Narkis's father sat at the box office, and his
beautiful, widowed sister, Rikuda, was the secretary. She was quite
a buxom lady, always dressed in very wide skirts, like a Spanish
flamenco dancer, and like these, she had her dark hair piled high in
brilliant curs, and looked altogether very striking. The museum was
really a family affair, except for a man of all jobs, called Ox, who
was generally referred to as "The Old Ox" He claimed to have been a
coachman, and later a tram driver in Vienna. But nobody knew for sure,
and nobody knew how old he really was. He was quite gruff, and comical
in the way he messed up words of foreign origin. His dumpy wife could
sometimes be seen inside the museum with a feather duster which she
used quite ineffectually. In short, it was rather a family affair.
My father had been engaged to turn this one-subject collection
into a real museum, which he did in the course of time, of which I
shall write later, when I come to my father's particular life story.
The salary was very meagree, to put it mildly. Not only that, but in
those days, before unions, in an institution like this one, salary
was withheld as far as possible, I don't know how often my father had
to run to the offices of the Jewish Agency to whom this museum
belonged, and literally had to bang the desks to get what little was
due to him. My father tried to supplement his income by writing
articles, and giving lectures accompanied by slides in private
homes, and later in kibutzim.
Life was very hard indeed, and particularly hard for my mother,
to have to share a flat, and especially a tiny kitchen, where all
cooking was done on kerosene primus stoves, which were quite
efficient, once you had got them going, but were rather like setting
off a rocket, and gave off a terrific heat. For milder cooking there
was the "Silent Louise" a little kerosene cooker with either one or
two wicks. Wicks always had always to be trimmed, and kept clean, and
so had the ducts of the primus stoves, there were no fridges, only ice
boxes. Cooking electric, or buying bottled gas, was very expensive.
So nearly everybody cooked on the "Primus" The kitchen situation
was not only difficult, but was made worse when the first Chamsins
started to appear in May, and then the half year hot season
started. The combined high temperatures, plus the heat from the
cookers, turned the kitchen into an oven and life outside it gave no
relief. My poor mother had a severe depression for the first time in
her life. She could not get out in the heat of the day, it made her
feel awful, and she was crying a lot. She visited a lady doctor whose
name I think was Dr. Rachel Freund, She was always talked about with
great reverence. This lady must have helped her a great deal,
probably with medications and talks. It took my mother probably a
year to get over the worst of her depression. In 1938 my mother's
parents came over to see if they could stay, an event about which I
have already written in the chapter about my grandparents. Their
Then war broke out in 1939, and my
departure was another blow.
grandparents were trapped. So what tiny shred of comfort was left?