Somehow during those years my mother slowly pulled herself
together with the help of her own wisdom, the life enhancing presence
of my father, the proximity of her much beloved brother, and the
duties of every day life.
She helped my father to prepare the slides for his lectures.
In those days, you did not have the film slides with little
projectors of our days. My father had a huge projector in a battered
old suitcase, which he carried around for his lectures. For the
slides, he photographed illustrations from books. He did the dark¬
room work himself, turning the kitchen into a dark-room.
He printed the photographs onto 10 cms square glass slides. The
sensitive side of the glass, with the print on, had to be protected
with a plain glass. In order to stick them together, special paper
tape was stuck to all 4 edges of the double glass. This was a job for
my mother, and sometimes I helped her with it. Altogether, my father
accumulated 100dreds of those slides, and later a cabinet maker, made
a special cabinet for them. After my father's death, it all went to
the Haifa Museum, where they are probably mouldering away, as in our
high-tech age, they are unfortunately of no use to anybody.
In Jerusalem, my parents met again with the artist, Mordehai
Ardon, who had been a friend of my father from the Berlin days. At
that time he had been an actor and a photographer, but in Palestine he
slowly developed into a world famous artist. Another artist of my
parent's circle was Leopold Krakauer, Elka, for short, just using the
initials. He was a great architect, who brought imagination, and
beauty into the drab Bauhaus Style building going on at that time. He
was also a suber draughtsman, drawing the wild, bare Judean
landscape, around Jerusalem. the twisted olive, trees, and the
menacingly beautiful thistles, in black or sepia chalk. He never
used any colour, only once at a special occasion: I had come to
Jerusalem with Ilan, when he was 3 or 4 years old, and Elka fell in
love with him, Ilan was a very dainty child, with a sensitive face,
and very blonde hair, When he smiled, which he did quite often, two
dimples appeared in his cheeks, and people were carried away.
Elka was a very silent person, who rarely spoke. He was friendly,
smiling, but introvert. But he took Ilan on his knee, and asked him if
he could draw anything for him. Ilan promptly asked him to draw a man
on a tractor, which Elka did in blazing colours. He also drew an
animal for him in colours, and Elka's wife, his daughter Trude, and
his mother could not get over the fact that he actually drew in
These drawings are now with Trude Dotan, who is an
colours!!!
archaeologist. And quite by the way, I would like to remember here
Elka's mother, who had managed to come to Palestine before the war
from Vienna. She was a very small, round old lady, with her pure
white hair done up in a bun at the top. She was always in a house
dress, and apron, cooking and baking a lot. She spoke in a lovely
Viennese accent, and like any true Viennese, she dressed up every
afternoon in her best clothes, and went to the "Kaffee-House, in
Rambam Street.
Elka's wife, Grete was also a painter, quite academic in style.
she was a good painter, but nothing as special as her husband. She
gave me my first drawing lessons, which were a bit boring, but
probably quite useful. Being a free lance architect and artist was
not lucrative in those days, so Grete supplemented the family's
income by sewing sheepskin slippers with the wool inside, to keep
the wearer's feet warm As she had more work than she could manage, she
passed some of the sewing work on to my mother. It was badly paid, but
it brought in some money.