It was hard work, as the leather was pretty tough. I remember
helping my mother, by tying up the end bits of cotton, after she had
sewn the seams on the machine, and embroidering around those external
seams with coloured cotton in a kind of cross stitch.
My mother tried to learn Hebrew, but she had difficulty reading
the characters. Her eyesight had never been very good. She had
astigmatism, and it was very hard for her to see the difference
between "Dalet" and "Resh", "Samech" and "Mem" and so on. Later in
her life, when times were less hard, when she was no longer pressed
with tough jobs, and a difficult life-style, she continued to teach
herself Hebrew. She could write quite nicely. Her handwriting was
extremely beautiful and regular anyway, showing her inner harmony.
Her Hebrew letters were absolute calligraphy. And although she could
never understand rapid-fire Hebrew, she manged to make herself
understood, if necessary. Especially by the various cleaning ladies
that passed through her life.
It must be said however that the Hebrew of the cleaning ladies was
pretty primitive in those days too. In the thirties and forties most
people came from abroad, and Hebrew was elementary, except from those
who had been brought up on it, and which were probably just about half
of the population I remember however, that once when I visited my
mother in the late seventies or early eighties, I found her on the
phone, having let myself into the flat with my key, and to my
surprise, she was speaking fluent Hebrew to someone. I cannot
remember ever having been so surprised in my whole life, I think, she
did not let on that she could speak Hebrew when necessary, because she
never liked the language, and thought it utterly ridiculous that
modern Hebrew was not spelt in Latin characters, to make it easier for
all Europeans, and other nationalities to understand, the way the
Turks had latinised their alphabet.
To return to the early days in Jerusalem in the late thirties: My
mother knew she would never teach at school again, because of the
language and also because of the very rough tone and manners of the
population, which were so different from what she had been used to,
and which did not make things easier. However after I had started
studying privately for my London Matriculation, in about 1940, she
saw, an opening there, and started giving private mathematics
lessons, in either English or German.
Although my mother had never learnt any cooking, because her
mother, who had really been an excellent cook, who could turn out a
meal, preserves, cakes and biscuits like a professional chef, did not
tolerate any one in the kitchen, except the maid fordoing the menial
jobs. She never taught her daughter anything about cooking. So when
my mother had to do her own cooking in the Paris days, and later in
Jerusalem, she taught herself. She told me it was "easy" because she
had studied chemistry. She became quite a super cook herself, and she
taught me. Our styles were different, but although I am now talking
about myself, I know that I am a pretty good cook too. My father loved
both my mother's and my cooking, and never failed to remark about our
different styles, It was in those Jerusalem days, when my mother was
really not well, that I got my first cooking lessons. My mother was
lying down, and told me exactly what to do. I went into the kitchen,
did what she said, and came back to her sofa. pot and wooden spoon in
hand, and asked her, if this was right? So I learned cooking and
baking, and really enjoyed doing it, and was able to help my mother at
the same time.