Here I have to insert another personal remark; I learnt cooking
from my mother, but cleaning from a young Kurdish girl who was one of
our many "Oserot" (Cleaning ladies.) My parents and my aunt and uncle
always had a cleaning lady, they came and went for various reasons. If
they were orientals they usually came as young girls, got married,
had children, and vanished. Once we had one German girl who was very
nice. She always had lunch with us, and insisted on doing the dishes
afterwards for "Free. It was not so free after all, for after lunch,
when she was on her own in the kitchen, she pinched some of my aunt
Thea's silver, and it being wartime, she pinched some of our reserves
of sugar, flour, and even kerosene; which she siphoned off in bottles,
from a gerry can! One day my aunt managed to catch her "In flagranti
and the poor girl broke down, saying that she was getting married, and
needed some money. My aunt told her, she would forget about the whole
thing, provided she brought the silver, cutlery back. She never
returned, but her rather horrified fiance came instead, returning
everything, and saying that she must be a kleptomaniac. In spite of
this they eventually got married.
This Kurdish girl was an orphan living with her relations. She
was illiterate, and unfortunately very ugly. But the way she
systematically cleaned the flat was a work of art, and I learnt from
her by observing her. One day she started coming in very beautiful
dresses, telling us that she was being fitted out for her marriage.
She had never seen her future husband. It was an arranged marriage
The only thing she knew about him was, that he was a street porter. In
those days street porters were sitting on the curb near the Central
Bus station, and other places where they were likely to get work. My
aunt The had long talks with her, because she quite rightly thought,
that the girl was being trapped into something. She offered her to get
her a place in the Beth Ha-Chaluzot (Pioneer Women Institution) where
she would learn to read and write, and also learn a trade, but the
girl was afraid to do that. It would have meant never to see her
family again. So she got married, and appeared on our doorstep the
night after her wedding, beaten black and blue by her husband. My aunt
put her up for the night, but otherwise there was not much she could
do for her.
She continued to work for a while, Her husband continued to beat
her up, and run after other women. She stopped coming before her first
child was born, Years later we met her in the street. She was now
dressed in Kurdish costume. She had several of her children with her.
She said, that her husband was now a lorry driver. She could hardly
have been more than thirty, but she looked an old woman, with wisps of
grey hair escaping from under her turban. There had always been a
special look in her very dark eyes. A look of knowledge blended with
pity and patience, I know that this paragraph does not exactly relate
to our history, but I feel I would like to remember her in those few
lines, as she was an unusual character, and I always wondered what
kind of life she would have led, if she had been able to accept my
aunts offer of freedom.
As the years went by, and my father started to turn the Betsalel
Museum into a real museum, my parents became more and more involved in
the Jerusalem social life, which consisted mostly in their case of
German Jews like ourselves, who were called by East European Jews
"Yekkes". Nobody knows what that meant. Some said, it was because
Jews from Germany came to the country wearing short jackets. Others
said, it was an acronym of the Hebrew "Yehudi Kashe Havana" which
menas a Jew who was of slow understanding. There really was this very
fundamental difference between German Jews, and East European Jews.