guard there, and a few paces on was a handsome, but solitary house
with flats, built by an Armenian. The house was called Beth Chanania.
In those days, houses in Jerusalem not only had numbers, but names as
well. We lived in a Beth Lapidoth, so called, because the name of
My parents had friends in one of the
the landlord was Lapidoth.
apartments of the Beth Chanania. It was the Kahana family. Dr. Peter
Kahana was an archaeologist. He was a very interesting and extremely
but to
erudite man, and a very amusing conversationalist,
everybody's embarassment he treated his wife like a servant. Yet she
was one of the nicest women one could think of, She did not have a
higher education, and that is probably why he treated her the way he
did. He despised people who had no higher education. Yet his wife had
She was not
always been his secretary, and that was how they met.
Jewish, and she was a real German housewife, and an excellent mother,
and altogether a much nicer personality than he was, in spite of his
being so extremely well educated and knowledgable.
So we really lived at the edge of the city, and some people were
too frightened to come and see us at night. Nowadays, this bit of Gaza
Road, if it still called that, and the Beth Chanania are swallowed
up in a huge modern quarter, and quite difficult to locate.
The area where we lived was called Kiryat Shmuel. If I remember
correctly, during the days of the British Mandate, Jerusalem was
divided into areas, which were governed by a Jewish council, who
collected the money for elctricity and water. Unfortunately the
Kiriat Shmuel council was nothing but an assembly of religious
rogues. They collected the money for the services, but they never
handed it to the authorities. So that quite frequently we were left
without water or electricity. My father who was the fighter in the
family, and a few like-minded citizens, had to storm the Council, and
get them to pay what they owed the electric and water companies.
Of course these difficulties did not make life easier. Our
landlord, Mr. Lapidoth was another small time crook. We had central
heating in the house, which was included in the rent, I think. Now Mr.
Lapidoth did not like to pay for the heating oil, so he quietly went
into the boiler room, which was accessible from outside the house,
and sabotaged the boiler, so it could not work. Then it usually took
ages for someone to come and repair it, while we froze around smelly
kerosene stoves. But I seem to remember that one day all the tenants
of the house put a stop to this activity, by paying themselves for the
heating oil.
Those were but a few aspects of the difficulties of life in
Jerusalem in those days, which did not make life easier, and which
caused quite a lot of stress. Also, the period I am talking about,
were the years between 1937 and the end of World War II. Between 1937
and the start of the War in 1939, there was a great deal of political
unrest in the country, caused mainly by attacks of Arab gangs on
Jewish settlements, buses and institutions. With the outbreak of the
War these unrests stopped. In the Palestine of those days, the war
itself was not felt as such, but people were of course much aware of
it. First and foremost because of the dreadful fate of our people in
Europe, which caused much concern, anguish, and sorrow. Then there
was the presence of the various armies, the British, the Australians,
the Polish Army in Exile. Jewish young people enlisted in the British
Army, the Jewish Brigade was formed. The German army in the Western
Desert caused real concern. We always stored food reserves for
emergency situations, and I remember that trenches were dug in what
is now the Nature Reserve on Mount Carmel, to stop German
tanks!!