I remember seeing those trenches still in place about the year 1980,
and trees growing out of them. The danger in those days was very
real, and there was immense rejoicing when Field Marshal Montomery
overpowered Rommel and his forces in El Alamein in North Africa, and
thus the dreadful menace of a German invasion of the Middle East came
to nothing, and people breathed easier.
Although families sharing a flat was never easy, it was made
agreeable because all the people involved were civilised, I remember
with great pleasure that every Friday evening we sat in Thea's and
Guenther's living room, which at night was turned into a bedroom, the
sofas being turned into beds, and we listened to the Friday evening
concert on the radio in reverential silence. It was there that I
learned to appreciate classical music. After the concert, my father
and Guenther usually discussed the performances in professional
terms. It was a wonderful ending to a humdrum week. The next morning
we all had breakfast together in the same room. A good Shabat morning
breakfast with toast, boiled egg, and lots of good conversation,
Speaking of concerts; It must have been around that time that
Arturo Toscannini came to Palestine, for the opening of the what is
now the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra, a very basic concert hall had
been built in the grounds of the Tel Aviv Exhibition Centre. It was
hard to get a ticket, and probably quite expensive too. My father and
Quenther bought one ticket which they shared. It was not even a proper
seat. It was just sitting on the stairs between the aisles of the
concert hall. My father listened to the first half, went out during
the interval, and handed the ticket to Guenther, who listened to the
second half. They returned home very happy.
In 1942 the long awaited Gabriella was born, and that made
everybody very happy too, I said, long awaited, because The had had
years and years of trying to get pregnant, and finally it worked, so
to speak at the last minute. She was the sweetest, baby, with dark
brown curls and big black eyes. But once there was a terrible time
when she got thypnoid while still being a baby,
The and Guenther
had been holidaying in Nathanya, with Thea's brother Ludwig and his
wife Kaethe, and for some reason Gaby caught the typhoid. The and
Guenther came home in a taxi with Gaby nearly unconscious with a
raging temperature. Quenther was crying. To this day I can never
understand why they did not get her into the nearest hospital in
Natanya. But the situation was so upsetting, and so stressful, and so
miserable altogether, probably no one asked, questions. Gaby, was
kept at home, under the supervision of the excellent pediatrician,
Dr. Engel (Dr. Angel, which he really was) But apparently in those
days, nothing much could be done except wait. We had very anxious days
waiting, but finally, Gaby overcame the crisis, and recovered quite
fast, if I remember correctly. What a relief!!!
I remember we all went for our regular anti-typhoid shots once
year. So I don't understand why Gaby got the typhoid at all.
As I have mentioned earlier there was peace between Jews, and
Arabs during world War II. In those days, an elderly Arab, selling
es
came every week from the nearby village of Malkha, whose
minaret tower over the hills in a northwesterly direction, we could
see from our garden. After we had become regular customers, and got
acquainted, he brought his wife with him. She was a lovely young
woman. One week later, she again came with her husband, and brought my
mother a sweet little nosegay (a small bunch of flowers) because she
thought my mother was sweet. After that, whenever she came, she
brought little nosegays for my mother.