This was the effect my mother always had on people. They just
loved her at first sight. The same went for children and cats and
dogs. Sometimes my parents were invited to a place where there was an
impossible child, usually misbehaving all over the place. My
mother just talked to it, and it became an "instant" angel
If she visited a place with one of these yapping little dogs
she just talked to it, very gently, as was her wont, and the dog
stopped barking, started wagging its tail, with a very surprised
look on its face, wondering probably, what on earth had happened to
it. If there was a cat in the room, it usually jumped straight on to
my mother's lap. It must have been her beauty and an irradiation of
harmony that attracted every one.
Another Arab who came regularly during those days was a
butcher's messenger boy who delivered meat. It was camel meat, and
it was very tasty. His boss had a butcher's shop in the Old City, much
patronised by the non kosher eating Jewish population, His meat was
good and cheap. So this butcher got a messenger to make home
deliveries, thereby enlarging his business. It was always came
meat. The messenger spoke broken Hebrew, but quite good German, which
he had probably caught from his German and Yiddish speaking
customers. Whenever he delivered the meat, he also explained in
German what it was.
Today, he would say, "I brought you some very good veal". Or it
would be beasteak, or a chop, or schnitzel. But it was just camel.
Everybody was having a good laugh. And especially the butcher must
have been laughing all the way to the bank. His messenger too, had a
good time. At first he came by bus. After a short time, he came on a
bicycle, and finally he came roaring in, on a powerful motorbike!
A few houses up the road from our house, there was a small stone
bungalow set back in a pretty garden where an Arab baker lived with
his wife and family. He had a large oven, and lots of ladies in the
neighbourhood brought trays of biscuits and cakes which they had
made, to be baked in his oven. Most people did not have a cooker with
an oven. Cakes were baked on the primus in a great invention; called
the Wonder-pot Basically it was a cooking pot with a hole in the
middle to let the heat in. The lid had holes on its rim, to let the air
out. You could bake excellent cakes in it, but it was not suitable for
biscuits of flat fruit tarts. So whoever had ambitions for biscuits
and tarts, brought their tray to the baker. In the afternoon the
baker usually sat on a chair, or stood on the edge of his garden wall,
which was about 2 meters above the pavement. There he sat, a portly,
middle aged gentleman, looking peacefully at the scenery in front of
him, probably cooling off from his hot work in the bakery,
Very, very sadly, as soon as the State of Israel was declared,
and war raged in Jerusalem, he fled with his family. I often wonder
what had become of them. They were peaceful people, very much revered
by their Jewish neighbours, and they like so many others, became
innocent victims of a war which they did not chose to make
Of course, the Old City butcher's messenger stopped roaring on
his beautiful motorbike through the Rehavia quarter where we lived,
and the Arab couple from Malkha disappeared too, as did the whole
village. A saw what had become of the village of Malkha many years
after the war. Neither I nor my parents lived in Jerusalem any more. I
was on a visit, and happened to pass Malka, which had been taken over
by oriental Jewish immigrants. It looked a rather horrible mess, of
old Arab houses with ugly, new and crude concrete additions. I
preferred not to look. It was too sad, and I wondered too what had
become of the egg seller and his lovely wife.