34
This brings me to the very dreadful events of 1948. At that time,
I was married, living in Givataim, or Shechunat Borochow, as it was
then called, a rural suburb of Tel Aviv. We lived in a tiny, tiny flat
on top of a steep hill. In 1947 my mother came to visit us. As there
was no room for her to stay with us, I had rented a room for her with a
family who lived at the bottom of the hill. The last evening before
her departure, I said good bye to her in the stair entrance of the
house she stayed in. As I left, I turned to wave to her, as she was
standing silhouetted against the light in the entrance. She waved
back, and I had a strange feeling, that it would be a long time before
we would ever see each other again. And so it was.
This is not the occasion to repeat what happened politically in
the years 1947/8. I also do not remember it very clearly, as it was
all very complicated, and the situation was changing from day to day.
Others will do better at describing this than I could. Suffice it
say, that there was again terrible bloodshed between Arabs, Jews, and
the British authorities, over what was going to happen. The British
Mandate was about to expire, and endless plans were put forth what to
do with Palestine. The British Government unfortunately sided with
the Mufti, a great friend of Hitler!! The Jewish population had been
promised a homeland by the Balfour Declaration. And the Arabs
thought it would be a child’s game to drown all the Jews in the sea. Of
course it was not as simple as that,
However, in those days, when the Arabs tried to annihilate us,
the British stood aside, and did nothing to prevent them from doing
so. At the same time the right wing Irgun Tzvai Leumi were fighting
the British with bomb attacks and shootings. So life became quite
dangerous in Jerusalem. My father, who during the years of the
World War had become quite friendly with cultured, and well educated
Englishmen, as had many other Jews, later always told me: The English
are ever so nice, but BEWARE of the British Foreign Office. They are
nothing but a gang of ruthless and greedy bandits". Considering
their records throughout history, absolutely agree with him
The situation was so grave, that one could not drive around the
city boundaries of Jerusalem any more except in armoured vehicles.
As the Jewish population had no such vehicles, ordinary buses were
armour plated. These buses drove regularly up to the "Har Hatsofim
(Mount Scopus) where the Hebrew University, and the new big and
modern Hadassah Hospital were, to carry up doctors nurses, and
University staff.
At the beginning of April, a band of Irgun svai Leumi (ETSEL)
had ravaged an Arab village, called Dir Yassin, as a retribution for
something the Arabs had done. Unfortunately, they behaved like
savages. The killed every one in the village, old people, women and
children in a barbarous manner. After this bloody deed, the Arabs
were only too ready to retaliate.
On Friday, the 13th of April 1948 a convoy of armoured buses, on
the way to the "Har Hatsofim" passed through the Arab quarter called
Sheik Jerrakh, where a huge gang of Arabs ambushed the convoy, and let
loose a barrage of fire, killing most of the passengers in those
armoured buses, whose armoured plates were powerless against such an
onslaught. On a hill overlooking this slaughter, a detachment or
whatever of British soldiers stood observing the carnage, not
lifting a finger. Among the dead was Guenther, who had been on his
way to work
Another victim was Mr. Kramer, a retired business man, who had
been working as a business manager in the Betsalel Museum for several
years, and who lived on the 3rd floor, in the same house as we did.