35
He had travelled to the Hadassah Hospital to visit his sick
daughter there. When the dreadful news spread in town, my father
rushed to where the dead were laid out, and identified Guenther. He
had been shot through the head. The family doctor who my father
consulted, assured him, that Guenther probably had not suffered.
That death had been instantaneous. But what had the victims suffered
before and during the attack we shall never know. Mr. Kramer's body
was never found, and his widow and his daughter had not even a grave
to mourn over.
At that time I lived in Borohov, as I had mentioned before. I
happened to visit my grandmother who lived with her daughter Alice
and her son-in-law Kurt in Tel Aviv. They had the the English
newspaper called the "Palestine Post", now called the "Jerusalem
Post". I was reading it, and reading about the ambush, and reading
the list of victims, in very tiny print, and my eyes caught the last
name on the list. Dr. Gideon Wolfsohn! Nobody ever called my uncle
Gideon, to my knowledge, but this was disturbing, I told Kurt, and as
not everybody had a phone in those days, he went to someone who had,
and phoned who knows who? and came home with the dreadful message that
the devastating news was true. I could not even get in touch with my
parents, except by letter. My father replied, telling me most of the
things, which I have just described, and ended by saying that they had
buried Guenther in the Cemetery of Sanhedrin, on a beautiful day in
trees, blossoming and the birds singing
spring, with the
overhead.
I do not wish to go into the details of the family's grief. It is
obvious, and a description seems to me like a tasteless piece of
indiscretion. Enough, if I say that even as I am writing this, tears
fill my eyes, 48 years after the event. All my dear ones are forever
with me, but especially those who perished by a murderous hand.
One wonders how life can go on after that, But it does in spite
of immense grief, and I really don't know how everyone went on after
this dreadful blow. I was not in Jerusalem. I could not even go there,
as the city was besieged, very shortly after the Declaration of the
Founding of the State of Israel, in May 1948. People in Jerusalem
went through hell in every respect. No water supply, no electricity,
hardly any food, and attacks from the enemy from all sides. Not only
did the family have to cope with grief and loss, they had to endure
the dreadful hardships of a siege. This is supposed to be a chapter
about my mother, but of course, external events cannot be ignored.
How she endured all this, is quite amazing. Perhaps because my
parents had to look after Thea and Gaby quite a lot during that time,
it kept them going, especially my mother. She had a responsibility.
But she became very ill because of the food shortage. She had always
been very thin and frail, and really had no reserves. The food
shortage was so severe that they went into the fields and cooked wild
spinach, As there was no fuel, they built a sort of hearth with bricks
in the garden, and cooked their food over a fire made from twigs.
As the family lived on the ground floor of the house, the flat
served as a shelter for all the tenants. A huge wall was erected in
front of the entrance door, and at night, all the inhabitants of the
house crowded into the flat with makeshift bedding to get a bit of
sleep. There was a huge water storage tank in the kitchen, and another
one was had been erected in the garden, but now they had to rely on
ambulant water distribution, as the taps were permanently empty.