36
In Jerusalem, under siege, times were undescribably hard for
everyone. There was a war on, around the borders of the country, a few
bombs even landed in Tel Aviv and its vicinity, and a few stray
bullets popped up, even in our neighborhood, and one even came
through our roof, but got stuck in the ceiling. But at least we were
free to come and go, and had enough to eat, as well as water and
electricity. My husband Uri was drafted into the army, with no salary
coming forth for the time being, I lost my job, as a handweaver, and
became a cleaning lady, literally living from hand to mouth, but that
was nothing compared to what my parents went through in Jerusalem. I
felt very anxious and worried. In the meantime I had become pregnant,
replacing a lost life with a new one, so I did not have to join the
army.
Finally a day arrived, when the army had managed to build a
footpath through Jewish held territory into Jerusalem, called the
Burma Road, apparently because a similar one had been constructed
under similar circumstances in Burma. Able-bodied men, among them,
my cousin Erwin, were walking up this tortuous mountain path,
carrying sacks of food and medicines on their backs for
the
population of Jerusalem. Each person in Israel was allowed to send
one shoe box full of food to their besieged family. It was one box
per family, and I remember putting in carrots, flour, salt, egg
powder, and maybe something else. I was so happy I could do something.
Very soon Jerusalem was liberated, peace negotiations started, which
were tense nad nerve racking, and the State of Israel could finally go
ahead, but at what a cost in human life!!!!
My parents came to see us, as soon as possible, and it was a
happy reunion. My mother looked alright, and the fact that a baby was
to be born, made everything cheerful, But she had nearly starved to
death, because of the totally unsuitable food, which she could not
tolerate, Friends had given up their rations of a bit better quality
food, to help her, and she was fit enough to sew a maternity dress for
me, from a material which I had woven, as in the meantime I had got my
job back. We also had received a backpay from the army, and I had
stopped being a cleaning lady, and washerwoman, which was a
relief.
Ilan was born to everyone's delight. He developed into the
sweetest baby, with silky, blonde hair, two dimples in each cheek,
when he smiled, and slanted, brown green eyes. My father always
said: "How did you manage to have a baby with cat's eyes?
My mother and father were ever so happy with this addition to the
family, and lan became the apple of their eyes. Ilan and myself
travelled frequently to see my parents, and sometimes Ilan stayed
there on his own, when my father picked him up, after he had been to
Tel Aviv, and came to see us, It was the best thing I could have done
for my parents, after all they had been through.
In the winter of 1951-52 my father was sent by the Ministry for
Culture and Education to Europe to collect graphics for the Betsalel
He had to go to Paris, Brussels, Antwerp, Amsterdam
Museum.
and London, and he decided to take my mother along. As he was on
official mission, there was no trouble of his leaving the country,
but my mother needed an exit visa, which took a lot of fighting on my
father's part to get, and they were not allowed to take any money
with them. When my father asked the people in the relevant office, how
were they supposed to get along, the answer was: "You'll have to stay
with relations." I really don't know how they got along, I suppose had
received permission to take some money. In any case, they did stay
with friends and relations everywhere.