3
My mother was still suffering from the after effects of the
food shortage during the siege. Her system could not tolerate the
good European good food. My father's cousin, Arlette Tromeur with
whom they were staying in Paris, sent my mother to her doctor, who
after having examined her, asked where she had come from. He said, she
was in the same state, as the concentration camp survivors, he had
seen right after WWII. He gave her some medication, which put her
right again in a couple of weeks.
For some reason, it was also in Paris that my mother applied for
Restitution Money from the Germans, something she had refused to do
so far as she did not want to accept money from murderers, I can't
remember what prompted her. Maybe it was my parents near poverty, or
maybe it was the sight of Germans walking around looking healthy, and
well to do. I know my father told me why she decided to apply at that
moment but I have forgotten, although somewhere the information
should be stored neatly away in my brain. I just can't type the right
keys to retrieve this bit, and other bits of information.
My parents enjoyed this trip to the capitals of the western
world immensely. It really rejuvenated them, after all they had been
through, and they wrote glowing accounts home. I remember how
especially they were impressed in Brussels, where all the streets
were decorated for Christmas, and music by Haydn was relayed through
the streets on loudspeakers.
They happened to be in London, when King George the 6th died.
They were returning on foot late on the night when the King's body was
lying im state in Westminster Abbey, and the gates would be opened in
the morning for the public to file past the coffin. They saw a queue
of people around the Abbey, standing silently in the bitter cold,
waiting to to pay their last respects to their late sovereign. It
was a most impressive sight, and one they never forgot.
They sent us a small sausage from France, a sight we had not had
for a long time, I hung it up on the side of our bookshelf in our bed¬
sitting room, because it was so precious, and we had one slice each,
every day. In London my parents also met with old friends from
Berlin, who lived in New York. When they heard about the food
shortages in Israel, they regularly sent us a food package from New
York, with lots of tinned meat which the doctor had recommended for
Ilan, who was suffering from rickets. We did have enough to eat, but
the quality was poor, and each person was allowed 100 grams of meat a
month, and one egg.
After my parents return from abroad, my father found that life
for him at the Betsalel Museum was becoming more and more difficult,
because of the director's jealousy of my father's achievements,
There were constant rows, and scenes, something very difficult to
bear for my very sensitive father.
At the same time, Dr. Hecht in Haifa had somehow persuaded the
Mayor Abba Khoushi to establish a museum of modern art in Haifa, and
to make his friend, Dr. Schiff, the director, Dr. Hecht was a very
influential man in Haifa. He had built the Dagon Silo with his own
means, thereby bringing jobs and business to Haifa and its port. Such
was his prestige, and I assume the power of his money, that the Town
Hall Sessions which he attended, were conducted, in German, because
Dr. Hecht, the great Zionist, whose hero was Dr. Herz, and who later
became an advisor to Menahem Begin, could not speak Hebrew!!
Dr. Hecht admired my father, and he wanted him in Haifa, and so
it came about, that the Museum for Modern Art was created, and the
directorship offered to my father.