38
It was no easy decision to accept the Haifa offer, it meant
leaving Thea and Gaby, and many good friends. On the other hand, my
parents, were glad to leave Jerusalem and its sad memories behind.
They had always found Haifa an attractive Mediterranean town, with
none of the gloom of holiness of Jerusalem and its religious
population, which was really depressing. These facts combined with
the difficult situation my father had with the director of the
Betsalel Museum, decided my parents to accept the offer, and in 1954
my parents moved to Haifa, to a tiny service flat belonging to the
Haifa Municipality in New Romema. The flat in 3, Palmach street
consisted of an entrance which was also the kitchen, a bathroom, and
a bedsitting room from which you could step into a pretty garden. A
year later a flat on the 2nd floor of the same house became vacant,
and my parents bought it with a mortgage from the Municipality. In
those days, this flat cost 8,000 Israel pounds, which was a
fortune.
My father's task was to build up a museum from scratch, a
delightful prospect, which made him say;" At the age of 63 I am the
only
young man fit for this kind of job." I shall write about his
work, when writing about my father's life in particular,
My mother found a job in the Technion (Israel Institute of
Technology) Library, as a classifier. The Technion in those days was
on Haar, in a an imposing building, built by the architect Baerwald
in the early 30ies. The library offices were housed in small rooms,
up on the 3rd floor. In summer it got very hot, and my mother had to
stop work for a few months. She got the job, because the Director of
the Library was Dr.Tunya Gladstein, who my parents had first met in
Berlin, when he was a lodger with the Serebrisky family about who I
have written earlier. The Gladstein family lived in Romema, and they
met by chance, one day, while strolling in the street, one
evening
My mother's task was the classification of, books on
mathematics, physics, chemistry, and related subjects, according to
the Dewey Decimal classification System. It is a much more
than the layman would think, to get the
complicated task
classification right, especially in scientific and technological
subjects, and numerous books have been written on the subject.
Moreover every year, additions, and corrections to the system are
published, which, in the days before computerisation, had to be cut
out and glued into the existing lists of available Dewey numbers.
This kind of work suited my mother's great knowledge of the above¬
mentioned subjects, her analytical faculties, and her well known
sagacity, as well as her deft hands, for doing the updating of the
Dewey System lists. She loved her work, and had great fun with the
Departmental Boss, Yitzhak de Vries, an engineer, who preferred
classification to engineering, and generally speaking was not too
fond of work, to put it elegantly, but was otherwise quite a mild, and
friendly person,
For some reason, however Dr. Gladstein never gave her a
permanency, under the pretext of her being only a part time employee.
I am afraid, for some reasons, he always tried to introduce new
persons to the various jobs in the library, and there were a lot of
unpleasant, things going on behind the scenes, which are best
forgotten. My mother worked as a classifier until her retirement in
1967 or 68.
As soon as my parents became established, they made plenty of
friends, and generally speaking enjoyed their Haifa life much more
than their life in Jerusalem with its many complications.