As my mother was working, my parents had established a little
routine to save my mother cooking in the hot kitchen. In those days,
there was a wonderful restaurant in Herzl Street, the High Street of
the Hadar Ha'Carmel section of Haifa. Hadar Ha'Carmel (which means:
Glory of the Carmel) is between downtown Haia, and the Carmel Ridge.
It was there that the first houses were built in the twenties and
thirties, and that is where the Old Technion Building designed by
the architect Baerwald still is, now functioning as a Science and
Technology Museum.
The above mentioned restaurant was called Matamim, which means
"Delicacies" It was run by a German Jewish couple, with typical
German efficiency, and excellent food. The head waiter, was a thin,
gloomy looking chap, never seen to smile. He rushed efficiently about
the restaurant with the speed of a galloping cat. His name was Alex,
and he was an ex-head waiter from a plush Vienna restaurant. My
father had his main course lunch there, and either stayed in town, or
came home, and had a desert with my mother. The Matamin restaurant
still exists, after many changes in ownership, but its former glory
is all gone. It used to be a cherful, bright bustling place. It now
looks sad, commonplace, and seems rather empty. About ten years ago,
I think, I saw an old old bent man in one of the Haifa streets. He sad
face looked familiar, as well as his now slowed-down gait." Now, who
was that?" I thought." Of course!" It was poor old Alex. How sad some
memories can be.
In the meantime the Restitution money from Germany had started
coming in, which made life much more easier, and my parents could
afford to go abroad each summer, to escape the heat, and forget the
daily worries. My father was very successful in his efforts of
building up a museum from a few office rooms in one corner of the big
Haifa Town Hall. And unlike the times before the restition arrived,
he did not have to rush around the country in unreliable Egged (the
country's only bus company) buses, lugging a heavy suitcase with his
big projector and slides, in order to lecture in various Kibutzim,
and other locations where people were interested in his lectures.
He was very popular as a lecturer, and I cannot listen to any other
lecturer on art, except to Sir Kenneth Clark, because the way he
presents his lectures, and his thoughts, remind me of those of my
father's.
So the restitution money made life easier and on one occasion
my parents at last went to Greece, I say at last, because ancient
Greek civilisation and art were my father's passion. Now, in his late
60ies, he could finally afford to realise his dream, and walk up the
Acropolis admire the Amphitheatre at Epidaurus, and, as he said:
"Visit the Oracle in Delphi." It was dream come true.
One evening, in Athens my parents were strolling in a park near
their hotel, when my mother suddenly clasped my father's arms
My ankle broke!" she gasped. It was a completely spontaneous
break, due to osteoporosis. She could not take a step further, By
chance, another couple from the hotel, were strolling in the same
park. This couple were German tourists, and they had tried to be very
friendly to my parents, because they were obviously the kind of
Germans who were ashamed of what had been done to the Jews, but my
mother had still had a deep aversion to Germans, and tried to avoid
them. It was very embarassing to her that they, of all people should
come to her rescue, but that is what happened. They called a taxi, and
put my mother inside, and so she was brought to a hospital. She had
suffered a multiple fracture to her ankle, and a very friendly and
deftly handed surgeon mended it perfectly.