She had to stay in hospital for over a week, and as she did not
want my father to sit around, doing nothing, for such a long time,
missing out on so many things he still wanted to see, they agreed that
he should travel around on his own, visiting the places, he still had
not seen, as she was very well looked after in the hospital. Everybody
was most kind to her, and they were a few people around speaking
French, who talked to her. And when people visiting other patients in
the beds around her, found out that she was a stranger on her own,
they came to visit her as well, and brought her sweets and
flowers.
Somehow, it was managed to get her on a plane later, and to fly
home to Israel, and carry her upstairs to the flat. But then the
typical Israel difficulties started. She had to be X-rayed a month
after the accident. And the X-ray department of the Sick Fund was
located on the third floor of the building without a lift!!!!
She was brought there by ambulance, but the ambulance men, refused to
carry her upstairs."Let her hop upstairs, they told my father.
Somehow my father, with his usual determination, and very polite and
refined anger, mixed with sarcasm, got them to carry my mother
upstairs. Any way, she recovered quite well. Unfortunately, at a
later date, she fell down the entrance steps to the house - there were
only two steps - and fractured her arm. Another time, she rolled down
a long flight of steps in the Technion Administration Building,
blinded by the light from downstairs, as she later said, and broke the
other arm! For the rest of her life, I was terribly concerned, that
she should not have another fall, because of her very bad
osteoporosis, and thankfully she never fell down again.
My mother had first injured her back, when in 1933, she had to do
all the sorting, and packing in Berlin, that job proved to be too
strenuous for her delicate structure.
When she was in her fifties, while sitting down for lunch, she
felt a terrible spasm in her back, and could not straighten up again.
It turned out to be a slipped disc. The doctor wanted to put her into
a plaster of Paris corset, but she refused, because of the terrible
weight, she would have to carry. So he ordered her to lie down for two
months. She did that, going to the bathroom with the help of two
sticks. When the disc finally had relocated, she had to learn to walk
again, because her legs had been out of use for so long. The doctor
wanted her to wear a corset, but she could not bear the pressure. So
she pulled out all the stays, and being good at dressmaking,
fortified it with strong material. The doctor, who was a very nice
man, rather a friend of the family, wanted to see this contraption. On
seeing it, he just shook his head, and shrugged his shoulders. He
thought it useless. But it did help my mother.
My father had not been well either from about a year before they
went to Haifa, whenever he went uphill, he had strong chestpains, and
had to stop for a moment. It was Angina, and he was given NT tables
to be dissolved under the tongue, ECGs were made repeatedly, but
nothing found. Nowadays, he would have been sent to hospital and
further checks been made, but in those days, heart disease care was in
its infancy.
So he went on like this for quite a while, until one night,
shortly after his 70th birthday, he suffered a massive heart attack.
The day before, a sculptress had organised her exhibits in the museum
before an exhibition, and was carrying her busts etc. to and fro. My
father, ever the gentleman had helped her, although, he knew quite
well, he should not have done.