7
At this time I was living in Givataim, a small town, attached to
Tel Aviv in the east. I remember getting the phone call from my
mother, telling me about my father's heart attack, but asking me not
to visit for the time being. When I finally could visit him, I found
him sitting on a chair in the ward, fuming with rage: "This had to
happen to ME!!!" he exclaimed. He had been the healthiest person on
earth, until he started his angina. He never had a day's illness
throughout his life. So, naturally this came as a great shock to him.
I think my mother had been expecting something like this in her
wisdom. She probably knew, that angina could be a precursor to a heart
attack. Again she was in a difficult situation, having to cope with
everything on her own. Luckily, my parents had an extremely nice, and
friendly doctor, which was helpful, as my father had many ups and
down throughout that year. However exactly a year after the heart
attack, my parents flew to Holland to attend a Congress of Museum
Directors in the Hague, which went off very well. My father even had
had a one hour conversation with Queen Juliana! He found her a very
intelligent, but very sad lady. On my parent's return, I said to my
father; "There, you see last year you were in hospital, being mad at
your fate, and exactly a year afterwards, you are having a
conversation with a Queen! Isn't that something?
My father slowed his pace down a little bit, and was doing
relatively well, I remember, one day, when I was visiting my parents,
he suddenly felt very weak and unwell, just as he was on the point of
returning to the museum after a short afternoon nap, and my mother and
myself were somewhat alarmed, and asked him to stay at home. He got up
from his chair, and said: "For heaven's sake! Let me live the way I
want to. One day, I'll just drop dead, and that will be it!
He took many pills to keep going, but he did keep going. However
at the beginning of 1964, he started to have mysterious pains around
his right shoulder blade. The doctor could not find a thing, his heart
was in good condition, but the pains did not go away. On retrospect I
really don't understand why he was not checked up in a hospital, but
maybe things were not done that way in those days. Towards summer the
pains got worse, but my parents decided to go to Switzerland all the
same. My father's pains got worse. At that time, my parents were in
Ascona, visiting his cousin, the writer. Jose Orabuena, who was
living there. Jose had an excellent Italian doctor. My father
consulted him, and this doctor, advised him to return home, and check
into a hospital for tests. My mother thinks, the doctor suspected
something he did not wish to talk about.
On one of their last days in Switzerland, while my parents were
walking across a square in Ascona, three nuns, dressed all in black,
rushed across their path, and my father had a premonition that these
three nuns were the messengers of death. My father, certainly was not
superstitious. He was an agnostic, who said of himself, when asked
about his beliefs."I am an ancient pagan!" probably thinking of his
beloved Greek Gods who are such fun. So, his having a premonition,
caused by three nuns was strange. But when people who generally are
not superstitions, have such intuitive feelings they usually are
right. I also think that the three nuns must have had some connection
in his mind with the three Ladies, in Mozart's opera "The Magic
Flute, which was one of my father's favourites. Those three ladies,
are of course the servants of the Principle of Darkness, and Death,
the Queen of Night.
We, my late husband, Ilan and myself, had gone to Lod Airport to
meet my parents on their return from Switzerland, and I went to Haifa
with them in a taxi.