12
I stayed with them for a few days, until arrangements were made
for my father to go into the nearby Carmel Hospital, which at that
time was still quite small, and nothing like it is today.
A few instances of those days remain clearly etched on my mind.
My father wished to type something, and asked me to lift the
typewriter from the floor to the desk, because he was in such pain, he
could not do it. And I remember my father by the door, leaving the
Later, my mother told me, that at that
flat to go to hospital.
moment, she was wondering whether he would ever return through that
door, I returned home, and my mother phoned every evening, to tell us
how my father was. It was found out that he had cancer of the
prostate, which strangely, had never caused any pain. From there the
cancer had spread to his lower bronchi. The pains in the back were the
result of the cancer in the bronchi. Because of his heart condition,
the doctors decided to treat this cancer with female hormones, a
rather benign treatment. On Thursday, the end of October, in the
evening, ny mother reported that my father felt much better. He had
been up, and they arranged for my mother to come at 11 the next
morning. On Friday, the 23rd, around noon, I had a phone call from my
mother, to come to Haifa immediately, as my father was much worse. I
knew what that meant. Ilan was at school, and my ex-husband was in
hospital himself, with a nervous disorder, I left a note for Ilan,
with food on the table. I phoned my sister-in-law to look after Ilan,
and just as I was about to leave the house, there was a phone call,
from my father's secretary, expressing her condolences!
It is amazing, how in times of crises, one finds immense
strength to do everything right. I did not faint, or anything like
that I just went to the Central bus station, and took a bus to Haifa.
On the bus, the driver switched on the 2 o'clock news, and my father's
death was mentioned on the news, as well as time of his funeral.
In Haifa I took a taxi to Romema, and on entering the flat,
found my mother on the sofa, and one of our family's best friend, a
pediatrician, and child psychologist, Dr. Kaethe Tannhauser, sitting
at her side. My mother had gone to hospital at 11 o'clock, as arranged
the previous evening, When she arrived at my father's room and bed, it
was empty, which was shocking enough. Finally she located a nurse,
who found the doctor, who had treated my father. He told her that
around 9 o'clock that morning, my father had called him as he was not
feeling too well. The doctor started to take his blood pressure, and
as he was taking it, the pressure fell to zero!! My father was no
more. Nobody even thought of contacting my mother. He was transferred
to the morgue, and my mother was left in ignorance, only to arrive at
an empty bed. Nobody offered her any help whatsoever. She must have
taken a taxi to the morgue. After my arrival she told me not to go
there. She said;"It was not your father there at all. Don't go.
From there on, my mind does me a disservice. Had the funeral been
on Friday afternoon, or on Sunday? I truly don't remember. I know
that Ilan came with his other grandfather, and my aunt Thea came from
Natanya, where she lived, bringing me a black scarf, for a
headcover. My mother bought a grave for two people. There were lots of
people at the funeral, as my father had been a well known, and beloved
man. The cantor who chanted the prayers, was a decent man, and did so
very discreetly. Yet, I remembered how my father had once told me,
that at his funeral, he did not wish any religious chanting, "Let them
play Figare", he said, "This is the spirit in which I wish to be
remembered." Alas, this was not possible.