Just before the funeral, while my father was laid out, a man who
was one of the religious crowd in the cemetery, jumped at my mother
with a razor blade, and cut off a piece of lapel, from her jacket! We
did not know about this rather barbarous mourning custom, and not
unnaturally my mother was immensely shocked. If we had known, we
could have prevented it. And I have never seen it done afterwards. How
my mother withstood all these shocks, was really miraculous.
We returned home. We had supper with the whole family. A
journalist phoned, "Excuse me, please", he said, "I was supposed to
be at the funeral, to report on it, but could not make it. Could you
tell me about it?"
No, I could not, I wasn't there to to do his job!"
The sheer Chutzpah of this fellow, at a time like this!
There was another phone call. This time, from a very good friend
of my parents, Liz Moller, a librarian at the Haifa University.
She had not heard the bad news yet. She just wanted to know, whether
my parents had returned from Switzerland.
When I told here
started crying on the phone. Yet generally speaking, she was not an
emotional person, being a German, not Jewish lady.
I remember, while my mother was talking to Dr. Tannhauser, I
went into the other room, where the wardrobe was, and I put my head
between my father's clothes, and cried.
Dr. Kleeberg, a very famous doctor and biologist, another good
old friend of the family came, and I remember that he told us, that my
father's life could not have been prolonged, except in great agony,
for another short while, that the cancer had gone beyond hope for
recovery, even it had been discovered at an earlier stage.
Piles of letters flooded in, friends came, but finally I had to
return to Haifa, and my mother, miraculously, or rather, with her
great wisdom, and clarity of mind, managed to get over the worst, and
friends, were not lacking.
My father had left the rough draft of an essay, called; "The
Chryselephantine (made of gold and ivory) Statue of Athena
Parthenos, in the Parthenon, by the Sculptor Phidias".
He had
written it on sheets of typing paper, folded lengthwise, so that the
lines were very short. There were also lots of remarks written
lengthwise across the margins. There were dots where there were
names, and quotations which he could not remember at the moment of
writing, and the hand writing was very hurried, and extremely hard to
decipher. My mother decided, to edit this manuscript, which meant
deciphering it, and finding out, all the missing names, and
quotations, many of which were in Greek, which she did not know
except for the alphabet. It was a Labour of Love. It took her many
years to do it. The first thing we did, was for me to type it, as far
as decipherable, in which task my ex-husband helped me very well.
Wherever we could not read something, we left a blank. The rest of the
job was done by my mother. She enjoyed this challenging task, and it
made her overcome her grief. She got herself, all the necessary
literature, and she had the help of that archaeological friend, Dr.
Peter Kahana, who I have mentioned in the beginning.
She also had the necessary patience for the sometimes, nearly
hopeless deciphering. She managed to write out quotations, and
poetry in Greek, and finally, to get it published in a Swiss
specialised, half annual periodical, called; "Antike Kunst" (Ancient
Art) where the essay appeared in 1973, commemorating the tenth
anniversary of my father's death. It was a task of many challenges,
yet with patience and goodwill, she not only overcame it, but also set
a fitting monument to both my father and herself.