1
Here is her preface to the essay (in my translation) when it
appeared in the Magazine: "Antike Kunst". It starts with one of the
German poet's Friedrich Hoelderlin's (1770-1843) most beautiful
poems. Hoelderlin, was surely one of the greatest poets ever, but
unfortunately, he became mentally ill at the age of 35, quite aware
of what was happening to him. The introductory stanza is from one of
his poems, where he begs the Fates (The three antique goddesses of
Fate: mistresses of man' life; Clotho, who held the spindle,
Lachesis, who turned it, and Atropos, who cut the thread) to grant him
another season for his art. He lived till the age of 73 (like my
father) shrouded in a private strange world, in the care of a
carpenter, who revered this man of genius, and provided him with
human care and dignity.
By a strange coincidence, on the morning of my father's death, I
had woken up very early, and for consolation, although I did not yet
know that my father would die that morning, but I was concerned to the
utmost, I was reading this very poem. I wish to present my apologies,
for not being able to render this heavenly poem in a translation
befitting its beauty. One would have to be a genius for that kind of
translation.
The title of the essay:
Parthenos, the Vision of Phidias.
Oh, Mighty ones grant me one more summer
And one more autumn, for mellow song,
So that my heart, filled with sweet play,
More willingly would die for me.
It is evening. The hand slides along the shelf in search, and
the eye looks for a friend from among the old, well known names, a
friend whose reassuring consolation, before falling asleep, might
show the way for some hope for the next day. Hoelderlin perhaps?
The books opens on the page where the poet entreats The Fates for
respite. These words are a shock, a presentiment.
This respite was granted only until the beginning of autumn, and
the handwritten manuscript, finished, but only one third of it was
revised once. Therefore, I found myself faced with the task, to
decipher the manuscript, checking all names and dates, remove all
the errors that had crept in, and to undertake an occasional
abbreviation in order to give more precison to an idea. I endeavoured
though the author himself, might have
not to alter anything
attempted a change here and there. It was only occasionally that I
exchanged a word with a synonym for reasons of style, as would have
been the case, could we have continued the dialoque about many works
The collaboration of the archaeologist, Dr.P.
of past years.
P.Kahane was invaluable.
To penetrate Greek thought, was a lifelong task for Fritz
Schiff, along others, which were set by his education and his
profession. The Greek lessons were the only happy memories of
otherwise tormenting school days. A stay of over three weeks in
Greece, in the year 1957 had been the culminating point of his
existence, the fulfillment of a dream of many decades.
Since the age of 9 the Acropolis had been an obvious content
of my consciousness" he wrote in his diary" I had to wait for 57
years, to see it with my own eyes.... here, there is no quantity. Only
order and wisdom are to be found here....... He who went up here,
took life in all its aspects, very seriously.... Each visit is an
inspiration.