45
Throughout his last years, troubled by illness, the books of the
Greek philosophers, and those who had thought about them, were his
constant reading material.
That is how, this text came into being after, lengthy
preparations; it is an essay, without any claim of being a scientific
treatise. It is an essay written with comprehensive knowledge and
deep insight, acquired during the course of a lifetime rich with
work - a legacy, it seems to me, of a man who took life in all its
aspects very seriously.
Hilde Schiff.
This preface is the best epitaph my mother could have written
for herself. It is the lagacy of a woman who took life in all its
aspects very seriously". Unwittingly this little preface describes
herself better than anyone could ever do. A sensitive soul, open to
beauty, steeled by pain, and a very precise thinker.
Dr. Hecht,
In the year 1979 the book was published in Hebrew.
who I have mentioned before, and who owned a publishing house, called
Shikmona, an archaeological site) wanted to publish it in Hebrew,
but he did not want to be the only one to finance it. In the beginning
the Haifa Municipality who had been my father's employer, wanted to
participate with 50 of the expenses. But then Abba Chushi, the mayor
of Haifa, who had been a great admirer of my father, died, and the
municipality withdrew from this project. Dr. Hecht managed to get the
University of Haifa to finance the other half, He had a few hundred
copies printed, but never bothered to distribute them in bookshops.
He sent copies to all the Institutions who might be interested, and
put the rest into storage. In 1985, after my mother's death, on the
very day, I moved into her flat, I got a phone call from Dr. Hecht's
driver telling me that he was coming with a few 100 copies of the
book, would I be at home to receive them? I said, sorry. I haven't got
space for a few crateful books, on the spur of the moment. I would not
mind having 2 dozens of copies, but I am just moving house. Why wasn't
I told of this before? He did not know. So I managed to get hold of Dr.
Hecht's secretary, who told me that Dr. Hecht wanted the space, and
I can't
thought I would be the right person to store the copies.
remember exactly what happened afterwards, I got a few copies. That
is all I know. I was also a bit miffed at the dictatorial way Dr. Hecht
went about things. But who said that a millionnaire, with umpteen
business interests should be a nice, considerate person?
The 1979 Hebrew edition of the book was published with a revised
More material had been published on the Athena
bibliography,
Parthenon, in the years between 1963 when my father wrote it, and
1979, when it was published in Hebrew, a period of 16 years. So the
publishers asked for a revised bibliography, which was compiled by
Dr. Ehud Lev, a young archaeologist at the University of Haifa. My
mother found him a very pleasant young man, and she was very happy
that the book was finally published.
While my mother had been corresponding with the publishers if
the magazine "Antike Kunst" in Berne, to whom she had been
recommended by Dr. Kahane, her correspondent on the other side, was
Ms. Martha Ronde-Liegle, an editor. When these two ladies finally met
in person, on one of my mother's trips to Switzerland, they became
instant friends, Martha was in her early forties, a divorced lady,
with a lovely little girl, and entirely devoted to her work, and to
her little daughter. It was Martha who introduced my mother to the
"Pension Erica", in Langenbruck, near Basle where my mother spent two
months every summer, until the end of her days.