46
Pension Erica was (and still is) a large, pleasant 3 story Swiss
house, built in 1909 by the present owner's grandfather, who
originally was a gardener, and who kept a large vegetable garden
around the hotell, using his own vegetables for cooking. When my
mother first came to Langenbruck, it was owned by the son of the
builder, Mr. Erich Mueller, and his wife. Mr. Mueller was a first
class cook, and vegetable gardener, his wife, a hotel manageress, who
did not mind serving at table, doing odd jobs, and minding the
beautiful garden. She was hard at work, tirelessly, from morning
till night. She was a lovely, friendly woman. Their son, was, and
still is, an excellent cook, who combined solid Swiss cuitine, with
oriental flavours, as he had travelled extensively before settling
down. As my mother returned there every year, the Muellers and
herself became good friends, It was a very safe place for my mother to
be, and they were comfortable, even walks around the hotel to some
woods and to the village. In later years, I accompanied her to
Langenbruck, and went on excursions from there on my own, because I
knew, that I left, my mother was in good hands.
In the summer of 1965, my mother decided to go on a trip to
Italy, Switzerland and Germany with Ilan, who was 16 years old then.
1964 had been a traumatic year. In September, my ex-husband's mother
had died. She was 76 years old, a very, frail, nearly blind woman, she
had suffered several heart attacks, and she kept alive through sheer
will power, probably because she knew that her husband would be lost
without her. And so it was. He had been an extremely gifted man in
many ways; he was a urologist, and a surgeon. His hobbies were
These subjects
precison mechanics, photography and astronomy.
exceeded hobby status however, as quite often, he earned his living
by them. He seemed, on the face of it, a most independent and strong
personality. However, after his wife died, he felt totally lost. He
died of a heart attack, obviously caused by grief, in January 1965.
So we had 3 deaths in the family, each following the next one.
This must have been the reason why my mother took Ilan on a good
holiday, which both thoroughly enjoyed. My mother knew Italy well,
through her travels with my father, and knew what to show Ilan. In
these days, she was still comparatively young, and active, only 67
years old. For Ilan's sake, she even went to Munich, as normally she
would not have set foot into Germany. She wanted to show him the world
famous Science and Technology Museum there, which is called the
Ilan ran all over the place, for several days,
"German Museum
while my mother sat in the beautiful garden, after she had done enough
walking around. Later she told me, that this visit had reminded her
of the days, when she had been a student in 1916 and had shown her
brother Guenter, also at the age of 16 around this splendid museum
for anyone interested in Science and Technology.
Speaking of going to Germany; after this my mother went back
twice. Once to see a very old friend who had settled in Heidelberg.
She was the widow of a chemical engineer. Dr. Loewen. The Loewens had
been friends of my parents since the Berlin days. They emigrated to
Paris in 1933, from there to Barcelona, and from there to Haifa, where
Dr. Loewen worked for the Electrical Company. After his retirement,
Dr. Loewen decided to attend lectures on chemistry in the American
University in Heidelberg, where he died. His widow never moved back
to Haifa, and my mother visited her once in Heidelberg,
Also my mother's cousin, Emmy and her second husband had retired
into a Jewish retirement home in Germany, and after Emmy's second
husband died, my mother visited her there once. But she very much
disliked the German atmosphere.