7
In the year 1967, my ex-husband and myself separated, and later
were divorced in 1969. After our separation, I moved to Haifa staying
my mother, and thanks to the restitution money, my mother could buy me
a small flat there, going through a divorce, is always a difficult
time, and also Ilan was in the army, at the same time, but my mother
really upheld everyone's morale. Just before my divorce I had studied
to become a qualified librarian, whereas before that, I had been a
private language, tutor, but owing to the difficult family
circumstances, I decided to start a new life altogether. As I had
visited my mother quite often in the Technion Library, and enjoyed
what I saw, I decided to become a librarian. So it was thanks to my
mother that I made my choice for my 3rd profession. The first one
having been handweaving, which had proved physically too strenuous.
The second profession, was teaching languages. I enjoyed being a
librarian. At first I worked in the Haifa Municipal Public Library,
which was mildly interesting, but extremely hot work in summer, as in
those days, air conditioning was only for the very rich. After a year
of work there, I got a job in the cataloguing department of the
Central Library of the Technion (Israel Institute of Technology) a
Technical and Scientific University, comprising well over 35
faculties, spread out over a huge campus on Mount Carmel. It was the
same Technion, where my mother had started work when it was still on
Haar. While the Technion was on Hadar, it looked like a medium size
college, but the New Technion could compare to any similar
institution of the western world.
During the days, when my mother still worked there, she had
moved up to the campus as well. She told me that on the first day in
the second floor offices of the library, it was discovered, that the
architects had forgotten to plan and
build toilets for the
employees!!! So one office had to be sacrificed for this important
necessity. This was not the only technical mishap of this building,
which was quite a furnace in summer with huge plate glass windows in
the actual library, and no ventilations for the librarians working
behind the scenes, In winter it was well heated, but the pipes were of
such inferior quality, that we regularly suffered broken pipes, with
water pouring down the cellings on all the papers. Then the heat was
shut off for repairs and we froze, as the electrical net could not
support electrical heaters in every office. There was never a dull
moment, but the colleagues were pleasant and well educated, and it
was fun to work there. Nowadays this library is a posh place, with
wall to wall carpeting, and air conditioning. It is completely
computerised, while I started my career there, typing on a typewriter
older than myself!!!
After my move to Haifa, my mother insisted that I learn driving.
At first I had some awful teachers, and things went very wrong. But
luckily I found a good teacher, and with a little perseverance, and
constant support from my mother, I managed to pass the dreaded test.
How right my mother had been to keep me at it. Having a car really
meant freedom, and I could help my mother a lot, driving her around,
and doing her shopping, and other errands. After the first initial
shock of my father's death and my divorce, and after I had found my
feet again, all with the help of my mother, I considered my mother to
be a very precious legacy left to me by my father, and felt that I had
to look after her, as if she was the most exquisite object on earth,
which she was, and I hope that I have done my very best,
One year before her death, my mother once said:" Whenever you
come in, it is like a fresh breeze," which was a confirmation that I
must have been doing the right things.