48
I hope I did make my mother's life more enjoyable during her 20
years of widowhood, where she must have missed her beloved companion
it often. After having finished with the essay on the Athena
Parthenos, she kept busy with a huge correspondence. There was the
family to correspond with. Firstly in Israel, she corresponded with
my father's sister who lived with her husband in Geva (a kibbutz) in
the Emek Yesreel (The Valley of Yesreel) where they had a married
son, and 4 grandchildren. My aunt Alice, was an excellent
correspondent, as she was a lady of great intelligence and wit. She
died about 5 years after my father. My other aunt, Thea, had moved to
Natanya, and we usually phoned, and I also went there quite a lot to
visit her. There was cousin Emmy in France, and later in Germany to
correspond with. On my father's side, there was Cousin Arlette
Tromeur in Paris. She too, died of cancer, in 1972. I shall write more
about my father's relatives, in the next chapter of the Family
History. My mother had another cousin in Australia, Ilse who had been
a dentist, with whom my mother corresponded until Ilse's death in
1975. There were many friends abroad too, there was her expupil
Erika Carius who I mentioned at the beginning. There were good
friends in Switzerland, like Nelly Aeschlimann, a lady of my age, a
piano teacher in the Berne Conservatoire who my mother met in
Langenbruck, and with who I am still corresponding. There was the
Reverend Dr. Walter Nigg and his wife who lived in Danikon near
Zurich, and who were the best friends of my father's cousin Jose the
writer, who lived in Ascona, and who liked to correspond with my
mother, because he like many others admired her, unusual
intelligence, His letters were nearly undecipherable, but as soon as
my mother had read them, she copied them, for further reading, and for
My mother had many
myself.
friends in Haifa, and a lot of visiting was done, where I would drive
my mother to her friends and vice versa. Strangely enough, towards
the end of her life, my mother was the only mobile person, among the
whole lot, and it was she who had to do the visiting.
I would like to recall here one funny incident, which happened
in Klosters where we had gone for the summer, before Langenbruck was
discovered, and where cousin Jose was at the same time for his summer
holiday. My mother and myself were crossing a large square behind the
railway station. We saw a man entering a parked car, and seeing us in
his rear-view mirror, he immediately got out again, and waited for
us. As we passed him, he bowed a little, and turning towards my
mother, he said in German with a little American accent: "Excuse me
please, are you Greta Garbo?" It was so funny, we started to giggle.
My mother, till the end of her life, could giggle like a teenager, and
she had a pretty mouth, and teeth too. Then recovering, my mother
said: "No, I am not." The man explained, that he knew that Greta
Garbo had a house in Klosters, but he did not know where, and wanted
to see her. He was living in Miami, but had met Greta Garbo at a party
in New York, where she had told him to drop in, in case he ever came to
Klosters. We thought this was very strange. If he really had met
Greta Garbo, he should know that she was a tall blonde, while my
mother was a petite and dark haired. It is true, they were both
beautiful women, but no one could hardly mix them up. The unknown man
started a whole conversation, telling us, that he was thinking of
retiring to Switzerland, that he had a brother in Tel Aviv, but did
not like it there, etc. etc. After a while, he looked at his
watch"Oh, dear," he said. "I must dash. My wife will give me a piece
of her mind, if I'm not back on time." And off he went in his car,
All this happened in broad daylight, with people passing by, so he