could hardly have had any sinister motives, We never could make heads
or tails of it. But a few days later I did see Greta Garbo in a shop.
and in no way did she look like my mother. In fact she had not aged as
well, as my mother.
Before, I come to the end of my mother's life story, I would like
to tell an episode about her Aunt Anna, her father's sister. My mother
had a great admiration for this Aunt, and her eyes lit up whenever she
spoke of her. In fact Aunt Anna, must have been very much like my
mother, very beautiful, and very intelligent. The following story
was only recently written to me in a letter, by her grand daughter,
Dodo Schlosser, who lives in Paris, and is my mother's cousin Emmy's
daughter. I shall translate her account from the French, as she
writes extremely well. The remarks in brackets are mine, in order to
explain to future readers a few things, which are obvious to us, but
may not be known to them.
"My grandmother Anna Wolfsohn was born in Wollstein (Province
of Posen, East Germany) on the 7th of January 1865, and died on the
She was a gifted musician who played the
12th of October 1950.
piano, and sang in choirs. On one occasion she sang in the choir
Wilhelm
conducted by
performing Beethoven's 9th symphony,
Furtwaengler. (a German conductor, 1886-1954 famous, for his
interpretations of Beethoven and Brahms)
Anna was very intelligent, and eager to acquire more knowledge.
She was a most sensible woman, of strong character. It was this
strength of character which proved to be most useful to her when she
A few days after her husband's death (she had been
was deported.
married to a Mr. Sklarek) on the 12th of October 1940, which was a
coincidence of dates of her own death, she was deported together with
other Jews of Mannheim (where she lived) in the direction of France.
For 48 hours the train she was in, was in the station of Lyon¬
Perrache, but we did not know this at the time. (Here I interrupt the
translation, in order to explain that Dodo and her mother, had
managed to escape, after the fall of Paris, with the help of Dodo's
German (not Jewish) father to the town of Lyon, where Emmy worked as a
nurse, so they were living in Lyon, but obviously could not know about
this train with the Jewish deportees)
Dodo's story" After stopping, the train went on to Gors near Pau
(Lower Pyrenees, South West France) where there was a camp held by the
French. This news spread like wildfire in the German circles of Lyon.
My father used his good relations, and established a certificate of
lodging, and acceptance of being in charge, for my grandmother.
My mother went to Gors to meet with the camp commander, who made
she
no difficulty of liberating my grandmother in June 1941.
survived the rigours of the camp and the winter (she was 76 years old)
in the infirmary, suffering from asthma and a serious bronchitis, a
disease which had become chronic, and from which she suffered every
winter. In this way, she came to live with my mother and myself, as my
father was no longer with us (Dodo's parents were divorced) she
continued living with us, and with Fred (Emmy's second husband) with
for once, seemed
Destiny
whom she had a good understanding.
understanding, I find that between my grandmother and your mother
their was a family likeness in their facial features, the way they
carried their heads, and their deliberate and determinate character
So far Dodo's story of her beloved grandmother who
of both of them."
had meant so much to my mother, who had seen quite a lot of her, when
she was still living with her parents.