When my mother was in her late seventies, I accompanied her to
the X-ray department of the Elisha hospital, as Dr. Munwes, her
doctor, had asked for an X-ray of her spine, Before doing the X-ray,
the hospital did a routine ECG on all patients over 70. We sat in the
waiting room, waiting for the results, when an excited nurse shot out
of the lab, and said to my mother; "You have had a heart attack
lately!" My mother looked utterly surprised, and so probably did I.
She absolutely could not remember having a heart attack. So the X-ray
was done, and her doctor was informed. To her great dismay, he put
her for 3 weeks rest into hospital. My mother was furious, and
thought that Dr. Munwes was overcautious, which he maybe was, but he
probably thought, better safe than sorry. After much searching in
her mind, my mother thought she might have suffered a mild attack,
shortly after the Yom Kippur War had broken out, in October 1973. On
that day, all the Arab States attacked Israel from on all sides, in a
surprise attack, which obviously through negligence of the Israel
Secret Service, came like a bolt from heaven. The day was very
cunningly chosen, it being the Day of Atonement, the most solemn day
in the Jewish Year, when the country is virtually at a standstill.
This is the day when not only the religious Jews, but others as well,
crowd the synagogues, fasting for 24 hours, chanting prayers, asking
God for forgivenness for their sins. However, when the the attack
started, an immediate call up of all the forces was issued, and even
very religious Jews, left the synagogues, and rushed to the three
fronts. I remember being at home, arranging some books when I heard
the unusual noise of planes overhead. At first I did not take any
notice, until I remembered it was Yom Kippur, when the whole country
was usually silent. Ilan was staying with my mother, and he drove up
to see me, and decided to drive to Tel Aviv with his car, and rejoin
his unit.
My mother said that sometime after this very dreadful day
there were hundreds of casualties - a she had felt very weak one day,
and not well altogether, but after a day's rest she felt better, and
in retrospect we thought that this must have been the heart attack
shown on the EG.
After Ilan had left, we got a postcard from him, from the Sinai.
He was alright. As all the postmen had been mobilised, there was no
proper mail service, but High School Children had volunteered to
bring soldiers mail to the families a week after the attack, Israel
gained the upper hand, but at what a price of human life, once more.
It was no wonder, my mother had a small heart attack, after what she
had been through all her life, of knowing her own beloved grandson,
the apple of her eye, at the front! Luckily it was only a small
attack. From then on, the doctor gave her small doses of a medicine
called Trasicor, to prevent further attacks.
I have mentioned that Ilan was in Haia. After having finished
his compulsory military service in 1970, he came to stay in Haifa to
take a 2-year study course in practical engineering, at a college,
attached to the Technion. My mother provided the funds for him to have
a rented room, not far away from us. Having finished his studies, he
first worked for a Car Manufacturing Plant, and later for a Marine
Engineer, where a colleague urged him to take a degree in Mechanical
Engineering. As the Technion, refused to recognise his two year study
course, the colleague, suggested that Ilan apply to the Tri-State
College, Angola, Indiana, U.S.A. where he himself and his father
before him had studied for their first degree in mechanical
engineering. Ilan applied and was accepted there, and his previous
studies recognised.