5
He passed his B.Sc. with distinctions, and went on to study for his
M.Sc. in The University of California, Los Angeles.
Although, as I have mentioned before, Ilan was the apple of my
mother's eye, she thought, it would be a good idea for him to go
abroad to study, in order to become more independent, although it
meant not seeing him every day, but perhaps only once a year. She
obviously thought the sacrifice was worth it. Little did she think,
he would stay there forever.
However, that me be, she took it all in her stride. One year
after lan had gone to America, we all met in Switzerland, in a place
called Chur. It was a lovely reunion, and my mother rented a car,
which la drove, and we went to many beautiful places together. By
chance Emmy, Fred, Dodo and her husband Roger also came to Chur for a
few days, so it was quite a family reunion.
Before Ilan was married, he brought Marcie over. We were
delighted, and my mother prophesied that Marcie would even be more
beautiful once she was over 40 And right she was. I flew over to
the wedding, and was stunned by everything I saw, wrote long accounts
home, and came back with stories of wonder. Later, Ilan came over with
Marce and Brian, then I years old, to the great delight of my
mother. She was 83 years old by then, and still alive when Randy was
born in 1982. But she never met Randy.
My mother had had two cataract operations while she was in her
late seventies. In those days cataract operations were not as easy to
undergo as they are today (I speak from experience, as I have had two,
and all I can say, it is easier than having a tooth extracted) In
those days, she could not have an implant, because, the surgeon said,
She had to stay a
the shape of her eye inside was too elongated.
week in hospital, and on coming home, she had to go around with a
bandage for 4 weeks, was not allowed to bend over, or to read, she had
to have help every day, and of course that was irritating too. The
worst bit was, that she could not have glasses made to fit. They
caused nause. The only answer were contact lenses. The local contact
lenses were not very good. One once shattered in her eye, while the
optician was fitting it, Luckily, he very deftly recovered all the
bits.
So, each year, when my mother went to Switzerland, she went to a
specialised optician who fitted her with good Swiss lenses. They had
to be taken out every month to be cleaned. So she neede two pairs. And
as they became opaque in use, she needed two pairs each year. She
learned how to take them out, and put them back in again, which was
amazing at her age. She had to do this frequently, because of the
dusty Israel climate, which caused eye infections. So sometims for
several days, she had these eye infections, and had to go without
(luckily) usually, one lens. One really must admire the degree of
fortitude with which she suffered all these discomforts. She never
complained, and was always cheerful. Was there ever such a
woman
In the summer of 1984, we were in Langenbruck as usual. My mother
had given me the means to take an organised tour to Provence, with a
company called "Academic Studies" which meant that we only visited
places of art and history. No silly shopping, or so called
entertainment. Our guide was an art historian from Austria, a most
ineteresting woman, who had obtained her Ph.D. in Art History at the
age of 50. Before that she had had a degree in Chemistry. She was a
live wire, and really entertaining. I returned to Langenbruck happy,
and full of stories to tell my mother.