I found my mother in excellent shape, fit and well looking.
Before my departure to provence, she had had a spell of a cold, and I
had bought her a pretty Thermos flask in a shop, which carried
everything, but well and truly everything, distributed over 2 floors
of a small cottage, and owned by an elderly lady, and her sleep big
collie dog. Her goods were not cheap, as hers was the only shop in the
village, but I wanted this flask for my mother, so she could have a
warm drink in the middle of the night, as one gets very thirsty at
night with a cold.
I still have the flask, which I cherish together with other
objects which had belonged to my mother. My mother had long recovered
from the cold, and on the 5th of October, a day or two before our
return to Israel we went for a walk towards an ancient monastery,
turned into a farmhouse. It was a pretty walk of about, one hour
through lovely gardens, and then through a wood. Of the ancient
monastery, a few weather beaten figures of saints, surrounding a
gothic entrance could still be made out. We sat down on a bench, neara
trough running over with water, bubbling endlessly through an open
spout. A pretty tabby kitten came to see us. It jumped on the bench,
and up our necks, and laps, and was quite funny. When we got up to go
home, it followed us for quite a while. My mother easily walked all
the way back to the hotel without stopping
We flew home on the 8th of October, a few days later, I visited
my mother, probably with the washing, as usual, and maybe with some
food I had cooked. I always cooked meat, usually turkey for both of
us, and also baked cakes, and biscuits, and always took her washing
in. As I was about to depart, and we were standing in the hall, my
mother outlined her plans, of what she was going to do in the next few
weeks. For the life of me, I cannot remember what it was. I only
remember she seemed to be very enterprising, and was looking 10 years
younger, than her 86 years. She also showed my a tiny egg whisk which
she had bought in that interesting shop in Langenbruck.
On Friday, I had supper with her, and she she told me that
during the night between Thursday and Friday, she had had awful pains
in her back. The pains were so bad, that she finally got up, and
walked to and fro in the living room for 20 minutes, until they wore
off, and she returned to bed, and now she was alright once more.
asked her why, on earth she did not phone me. "Oh, no; I would not do
"No, thank
that", she replied, typically, I insisted; Why not?
you I managed quite well. No need to disturb you.
I phoned her on Saturday evening, and she had just been on a walk
with Mrs. Berner, a very good friend of hers, who lived a few houses
away, I had some things to do on Sunday morning, and we arranged, that
I should come and see her on Sunday around 11 am. I had been pensioned
in July, and was no longer working, and starting to reorganise, my
workless life.
When I entered the flat on Sunday at llam, I found my mother on
her bed, with Dr. Rieck, who now for years, had replaced Dr. Munwes,
"Your mother had a heart attack, he told me, "I
sitting beside her.
have called an ambulance!" About an hour earlier, my mother had had
those bad back pains again, and felt so weak, she had to lie down.
Luckily, her cleaning lady had been there. My mother managed to phone
Dr. Rieck, who rushed to her bedside, recognising the symptoms.
During the past years, my mother had gone over to Dr. Rieck, who
lived just up the road, whilst Dr. Munwes lived in the middle of the
Haar, near the old Technion, and to see him, meant taking a bus, and
a trip to town. Dr. Munwes was a very good doctor, and a very nice
man, but Dr. Reck was fabulous.