53
He could talk anybody out of his or her ailment. He rarely
prescribed medicines, except for serious conditions.
It is from him that I learned that "The body heals itself" if
you wait patiently for 2 weeks or so, unless it is something very
serious. I remember my mother telling me, that her father had told
her, that you can recognise a serious disease by either continuous
bad pain, or a high temperature, "For other harmless ailments" my
grandfather advised, "Just take it easy, and lie down to rest," which
was basically the same advice, but Dr. Rieck was here, alive, and you
could go there, and talk to him, which alone was as good as medicine.
Dr. Rieck himself, died a few years after my mother, of cancer of the
liver. He refused to go into hospital, and be treated, and asked to be
left to die in peace at home. He was a wonderful man, and very much
mourned by his probably hundreds of patients.
To return to my story, the ambulance arrived, my mother was
carried in, looking pale and worried. I followed in my car. She was
put into intensive care, and once again, I cannot remember, what
happened next. The next day, she seemed better, but was much annoyed
by what the nurses had done to her hands. They had taken blood
samples, and her hands were all black and blue, because they could not
find any veins. The next few days she seemed better, but looking very
lost, and perhaps annoyed with what had happened. Then she was moved
into another intensive care room, which was unfortunately full of
people, who received hordes of noisy visitors, I complained to the
nurses at the desk, but they just shrugged their shoulders, and gave
the typical Israel answer: "What can you do?" to which I replied;"Get
the visitors out. There are some kids there, drinking soft drinks,
and reading the paper what are they doing in intensive care?" The
nurses just shrugged their shoulders. It was afternoon, and Mrs.
Tannhauser came to see my mother, and some other lady, I cannot
remember who I left, after my mother had had her supper, and said, I
would return early next morning.
My flat was 5 minutes walk away from the hospital, so I did not
bother with the car, I was half way up towards the hospital, when a
torrential rain started. It was really like the flood. The road, a
steep incline towards the hospital, turned into a raging current, and
the huge hospital, built like an inverted pyramid, seemed to float
somewhere above the waters like Noah's Ark. I had to take shelter, in
a nearby entrance, which was just a tiny roof, really. After a while,
the rain turned into a shower, the sun came out, and I ventured out.
Rather dripping wet, I came into the room where I had left my mother
the previous evening. She was not there I found a nurse, who told
me, that during the night, my mother had suffered a brain
haemorrage, and had been put into a separate room, which she pointed
out to me. The room was huge. It looked as if it could accomodate 6
beds. But there was only my mother's bed in it. Her hands were
restlessly moving on top of the blanket, but they were tied to the
raised railings at the side. She did not recognisse me. I went in
search of a doctor. Finally I located her. She was a very nice Russian
lady. She told me about the haemorrage, and that my mother had to be
tied down, as she was trying to get out of bed, all the time. "Your
mother is a lovely lady, the doctor told me, "I had a long talk with
her yesterday, before this happenend. I never met such a charming
woman," But this nice doctor could not tell me what would happen
next.
I returned to the room, and went up to my mother. This time she
recognised me, "How did you come in?" she asked. There is no door to
this room, I saw you crawling in under the curtains.