"But there is a door"? I said, very large door, Look, over
there" But my mother looked at me blankly with a little smile. A
nurse came in with breakfast. We tried to feed her, but she refused
to eat, and she was on a drip anyway, so I wasn't too worried about
that. However from her confused talking, I understood that she
thought, that she was still in Langenbruck, and wanted to go home. I
tried to explain to her that she was in hospital, that she wasn't
well, and could not go home, no yet, later. But she did not
understand what I said. She just repeated that she wanted to go home.
I was so upset, I sat down, in a far corner, where she could not see
me, and cried my heart out. After a while, I got up, and returned to
her bed, but she did not recognise me. I sat down again. She did not
look for me. She did not say anything, only her hands moved on the
blanket, and the monitor beeped quite regularly. I went home, and
returned later. She did not know who I was, I just sat there thinking
how my mother's wonderful brain had come to this. She also looked
rather strange, and I remembered what she had told me, after my
"It was not your
father's death, when she had seen him in the morgue;
father at all.
Later, the nice
doctor returned, and told me to go home and have a rest. She would
phone me, if anything happened. I went home, and phoned Dr. Rieck,
asking for advice, but he could not tell me, whether my mother would
regain her faculties. Presumably, worn out by fatigue, and worry, I
fell asleep. The doctor phoned me at 2 o'clock in the morning My
mother had suffered another serious brain hemorrage, and all was
over. Although I had lost my precious mother, I was grateful for her
release. She had reached her 86th year. She had had an eventful, and
rich, long life, Her last years, although without my father, had been
comparatively happy, and she was entitled to a good rest. I only
wished I knew she had not really suffered at the end. That maybe she
had slipped into oblivion with a nice dream, as people do on their way
to the beyond.
On the notice I put into the Jerusalem Post, I said:
"We say, farewell to Dr. Hilde Schiff.
I know one thing; One can get as old as the hills, but it is nearly
impossible to live without a mother, and a father, especially without
a mother. They both remain my constant companions in my thoughts, and
I like to think that they are up there up, among the stars, watching
how their daughter is doing. They still are there. Somewhere.