DR. GUENTHER WOLFSCHN.
My mother's brother, Guenther was born in 1900. I am sorry, I do
not know the exact date, and unfortunately there is no one I can ask.
I am afraid, I really do not know much about him, I shall endeavour to
put down, as much as I know, I have already mentioned him, here and
there in the account of the lives of his parents, and my mother.
He was of medium build, very slim and slightly built, with an
aristocratic, elongated face, and the dainty Wolfsohn noose. He
looked very much like his grandfather Dr. Max Meyer Wolfsohn. He
walked with quick small steps. As a child of course, he had a childish
face, and my mother always said that Yaron reminded her of Guenther as
a child,
He was a child prodigy, who could play the piano at the age of
three, and had an absolute pitch, I have in my possession, one of his
compositions, to which my mother had written the words. It is a very
pretty tune. There is no date on it.
The words are as follows: "The beautiful green wood, that is my
I like walking there, when the birds are warbling. When
above.
everything is green and flowering, I am happy in my mind. Oh you
beautiful, green wood, remain my dwelling place forever.
It sounds much better in the German original, where it rhymes as
well. And green woods were what my mother liked best till the end of
her life, and I presume so did her brother.
In the chapter about the family I have told how brother and
sister always did everything together, their plays and games were
always of a technical and scientific nature, or playing the piano
forhanded. There was one thing Guenther could or did not do, and
that was drawing, at which my mother excelled. Together the children
a three floor high Meccano dollhouse, including electric
built
light, and a lift, powered by batteries.
shall repeat here two stories, which I have put down
previously, but which belong to this chapter too. When Guenther and
Hilde were children, they lived in a two floor apartment. The two
floors were connected by a metal spiral staircase, which made
dreadful noises when ever someone went up or down. I know this,
because, when I was a small child, my grandparents still lived in the
same apartment. The children were busy constructing something
upstairs. Guenther went downstairs with a pot of glue, but he dropped
it, and it made a terrific noise falling down, bumping and clattering
all the way. My grandfather rushed out of his study;"Guenther?" he
shouted, "Is that you?" "No, father came the reply, "Only the pot of
glue! Everybody had a good laugh of relief.
Here is another story once more; Elberfeld, where the family
lived, was situated in a valley, surrounded by wooded hills, those
lovely green woods, so much beloved by the family, who took endless
Sunday walks there. In winter, with the snow piled high, the children
went up the woody hills, a long way up, dragging their sleighs to the
very top, and then slid down in a delicious drive, downhill, all the
way to town, When they came out of the woods into the streets, they
decided to take a short cut, through a lane, closed to traffic. At the
bottom of the lane, a policeman was waiting for them. "Don't you
children know, that traffic is forbidden in this lane?" he asked
sternly. Yes, they knew. "I'll have to take down your names and
address then, said the policeman, and took out his notebook and
pencil, When the children told him their names, the policeman stopped
writing: "Are you the children of Dr. Alfred Wolfsohn?" he asked.