56
"Yes,"they said, "we are.
"How sad"
said the policeman
closed the notebook, and put the pencil away, "How sad! Off you go
now, and don't let me catch you again.
Which showed how popular,
and well known my grandfather was, It was hard for the policeman to
believe that the children of such a famous doctor, and well known
upright citizen, as Dr. Wolfsohn, could contravene the law.
Guenther was not only a child prodigy in music, he distinguished
himself at school too. He finished High School at the age of sixteen,
instead of the usual age of 18. I have mentioned in the chapter about
my mother, how he visited my mother in Munich, where she was studying,
and they both walked around for days in the fabulous German Museum
which is a huge museum for Science and Technology.
Guenther must have studied in Munich as well. My mother told me,
how she, Guenther, and my father, once decided to go on a week-end
walking tour of the Bavarian alps. Among the food they took, was rice.
In the Alps they have huts, where people can rest at night, and cook
their food. On the first evening they boiled some rice. None of them
had any idea that rice swells up enormously, so they put quite a lot
of rice into their cooking pot, and got a huge quantity of rice, which
lasted them for days. That is how they learned to boil rice.
Another story from their student days was as follows: when
Guenther was young, he apparently had quite a short temper, and
easily got into a rage. Once, when all three were having a chat, my
father teased Guenther about something, at which he became so mad, he
picked up a slipper, and hurled it in the direction of my father,
which made them all laugh.
think that Guenther and his future wife The met at
university, where The was also studying mathematics, and related
sciences. She later became a teacher in those subjects.
Having obtained his degree, Guenther worked, I think, in the Ma¬
Planck Institute for Physics in Berlin, I hope I am right with the
name, but I am sure he worked in a big Institute for Physics. I met
Thea for the first time in my life consciously, probably after they
had married, and lived in a flat. It was Chanuka time, which was a bit
ahead of Christmas. The was the daughter of a Reform Rabbi. She came
from a home where the dietary laws of Kashruth, and the Lwas
concerning rest on Shabat were strictly observed. However, she had
broken away from them, as she told me one day. When she was a young
student, living on her own in Berlin in rented accomodation, she once
got very hungry on a Saturday, but to get to the nearest Kosher
restaurant, she would have to take a tram. She debated this with
herself, and went by tram. That was the beginning of breaking with
the traditions with which she had grown up as a child, and also of her
independence as a mature person. After that, she did not worry too
much about Shabat, and Kashruth, but she still liked to light Hanuka
candles, and do a Kiddush on Friday evening.
The was at Chanukah
So, the first time. I remember meeting
time, and she had lit a Chanuka candelabra (Chanukia) I had never seen
that before, and it was explained to me that this was instead of a
Christmas tree, but I don't think I understood what it was all about.
I must have been very small, as Thea knew me from the day I was born,
but I only remember her from that time on. She once told me that as a
new baby, I had the face of a small mouse with two big eyes. I really
got to know and appreciate The only in Jerusalem, and she became one
of my best friends,
In 1933 Guenther got an appointment at the University of
Utrecht, where they remained until 1936, when he got the appointment
as a lecturer in physics at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.