57
I am sorry, I cannot give exact dates, but that was really
contemporary history, and still being a child then, I did not pay too
much attention to details of adult lives, Much later. I never
discussed these things with my mother, in order not to open old
wounds.
I have mentioned that when we came to Jerusalem from Paris, it was
decided that both the Wolfsohn and Schiff families would live
together, and the flat in Gaza Street was found. Before that, The
and Guenther lived in a flat in Abyssian Street, so called, because of
the Abyssinian Church there, and Abyssinians living in the area.
In the chapter about my mother I have already written about our
life together in Jerusalem, how we always sat around the radio on
Friday evenings to listen to Friday night concerts, and how Guenther
and my father discussed the music. Guenther's (small) grand piano
had been sent to him by his parents from Germany. It stood in the bed¬
sitting room, as well as the two sofa beds in a corner, and Guenther's
desk. Guenther still played the piano, although he did not have much
time for it with his work load. From time to time, a lady who was an
amateur violinist, came to play duets with him, and we all enjoyed
that very much.
A short while after we had arrived in Jerusalem, we acquired a
kitten. Everybody was quite happy at the thought, but Guenther was
quite against it. This grey, long-haired male kitten passed its first
night in a corner of my room on some newspapers, meowing piteously,
probably looking for its mother, brothers and sisters: "Meeoo,
momeeoo." So we called him "Miu". The next day, at some time, Miu
had dispappeared; He was finally discovered sitting on Guenther's
lap, while he was working at his desk! It was the one place we did not
even think of looking for that tiny ball of fur. From then on Guenther
became reconciled to Miu, who unfortunately however, died very young
from cat's flu. After that we had no cat. The garden was full of
visiting strays, and that was good enough. Guenther worked a lot in
the garden, which was just a bare plot. It was a garden facing the
street, and raised about 4 meters above it. Our entrance was through
the garden. The entrance was reached by steps, which formed a street
up to the Kiryath Shmuel neighboorhood, which I have mentioned in the
last chapter. The only grocery in the neighbourhood for several years
was at the top of the steps, owned by a rather miserable looking
individual, who The called; The Pesterer, because he tried to sell
you everything in his shop you did not want, and even came to the door
to remind you of his existence.
Thea and Guenther transformed the bare plot in front of the
flat, into a real garden, with a rosmarin hedge running along the
fence, lots of daisy bushes, and other plants, A Bougainvillia was
growing up around the window of the living room, and Guenther planted
a eucalyptus tree in the middle of the garden to provide shade. They
from the garden of
brought the sapling from Natanyah, presumably
Thea's brother Ludwig, Later it grew to enormous proportions. Many
years later, when Thea moved to Nathanya, the flat and garden, became
a nursery school, and when the road was enlarged, half of the garden
was sliced off. The last time I was in Jerusalem, which is now ages
ago, I passed by the house. The eucalyptus tree was still there,
standing at the edge of the garden wall, instead of in the middle. It
looked quite forlorn.
I have mentioned the happy arrival of Gaby in 1942, on page 32 in
the chapter on my mother. So I will not go over it again. One incident
still stands out clearly in my mind. Guenther had been working at his
desk, pouring over books on physics, with lots of formulas.