This time little Gaby, perhaps two years old, was sitting on his lap.
She pointed to the formulas, "What are they?" she asked, "They are
small animals."her father replied. And she was happy with that.
I remember another story Guenther told us; He was going up on the
bus to the University at the beginning of a new semester, a very
chatty student satt next to him, telling him all about himself, and
not letting Guenther say a word, which was alright with him. Guenther
was not only young, he looked at least 10 years younger than his age.
So obviously the student thought, he was talking to one of his fellow
pupils. "I shall be in the class of Dr. Wolfsohn said this young
innocent, "I heard he is very very strict, and has no patience
whatsoever", and went on talking about something else. Half an hour
later, Dr. Guenther Wolfsohn was standing in the lecture room, facing
a class of new students. The chatterbox from the bus was sitting right
in the first row, and Guenther literally saw his face fall!
Guenther did have a great sense of humor, and I remember quite a
lot of laughter in the house, in spite of bad times and worries. I
remember, one lunchtime, when a big sauceboat was handed around. It
must have been a family piece, maybe of Thea's. At its base two bits
had been chipped off very symmetrically right and left. Oh, said
Guenther, "Somebody must have been very hungry.
He was laso enormously clever with his hands, and constructed
all sorts of clever devices, obviously on a lathe he had in his lab in
the University. I can't remmber what they were. But they had to do
with my fathe's photography, developing, and with his big projector.
Guenther also constructed a wooden loft, in the corridor of the
house. Its supports were lying on top of the doorframes below. It was
a huge job, very exactly done.
Unfortunately during his last years, Guenther was plagued by
moebic dysentery, about nothing much could be done in those days,
and quite often, he was very poorly, and miserable, and could not go
to work.
On page 34 of my mother's biography, I have already written
about Guenther's tragic end, and its sad consequences for the family.
He died young, but he has never been forgotten. His second name
of Gideon, has been given to Ilan as his second name as well in
remembrance for another generation.
It took The many years to rehabilitate herself, which she did
with admirable will power and energy. She studied, and became a child
psychologist. Her job was to examine children in nursery schools to
find out, if they were ready or not for school. She worked at this
job, I think, well into her seventies. At the age of 60 she married
Dr. Moshe Osterweil, a widower himself. Thea moved to Natanyah where
Moshe had his dental practice. For ten years they were very happy
together, and then Moshe died of cancer. The continued living on her
own, in Natanyah where her brother Ludwig lived with his wife Kaethe
too, I used to visit her quite frequently, and always felt very happy
there. After my mother's death, The was the last relative left over
from my childhood, and we had many memories in common. In her
eighties, life on her own became difficult, and she moved in with Gaby
and Chen, where she lived until her death at the age of 90.
She had been a remarkable woman, meeting life's hardships
with remarkable wisdom, courage, and kindness of heart to her fellow
men and so she will be remembered.